The Merchant of Venice
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/the-merchant-of-venice/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
PORTIA, an heiress of Belmont
NERISSA, her waiting-gentlewoman
Servants to Portia:
  BALTHAZAR
  STEPHANO
Suitors to Portia:
  Prince of MOROCCO
  Prince of ARRAGON
ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
BASSANIO, a Venetian gentleman, suitor to Portia
Companions of Antonio and Bassanio:
  SOLANIO
  SALARINO
  GRATIANO
  LORENZO
LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
SHYLOCK, a Jewish moneylender in Venice
JESSICA, his daughter
TUBAL, another Jewish moneylender
LANCELET GOBBO, servant to Shylock and later to Bassanio
OLD GOBBO, Lancelet's father
SALERIO, a messenger from Venice
Jailer
Duke of Venice
Magnificoes of Venice
Servants
Attendants and followers
Messenger
Musicians


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Antonio, Salarino, and Solanio.]


ANTONIO
In sooth I know not why I am so sad.
It wearies me, you say it wearies you.
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born,
I am to learn.
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me
That I have much ado to know myself.

SALARINO
Your mind is tossing on the ocean,
There where your argosies with portly sail
(Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea)
Do overpeer the petty traffickers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
As they fly by them with their woven wings.

SOLANIO
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Piring in maps for ports and piers and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

SALARINO  My wind cooling my broth
Would blow me to an ague when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy hourglass run
But I should think of shallows and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand,
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
And see the holy edifice of stone
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which, touching but my gentle vessel's side,
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And, in a word, but even now worth this
And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanced would make me sad?
But tell not me: I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

ANTONIO
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

SOLANIO
Why then you are in love.

ANTONIO  Fie, fie!

SOLANIO
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed
Janus,
Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper,
And other of such vinegar aspect
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

[Enter Bassanio, Lorenzo, and Gratiano.]

Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare you well.
We leave you now with better company.

SALARINO
I would have stayed till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

ANTONIO
Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace th' occasion to depart.

SALARINO
Good morrow, my good lords.

BASSANIO
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say,
when?
You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?

SALARINO
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
[Salarino and Solanio exit.]

LORENZO
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
We two will leave you. But at dinner time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

BASSANIO
I will not fail you.

GRATIANO
You look not well, Signior Antonio.
You have too much respect upon the world.
They lose it that do buy it with much care.
Believe me, you are marvelously changed.

ANTONIO
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,
A stage where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

GRATIANO  Let me play the fool.
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? And creep into the jaundice
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio
(I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks):
There are a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond
And do a willful stillness entertain
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say "I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark."
O my Antonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing, when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers
fools.
I'll tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.--
Come, good Lorenzo.--Fare you well a while.
I'll end my exhortation after dinner.

LORENZO
Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never lets me speak.

GRATIANO
Well, keep me company but two years more,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own
tongue.

ANTONIO
Fare you well. I'll grow a talker for this gear.

GRATIANO
Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible.
[Gratiano and Lorenzo exit.]

ANTONIO  Is that anything now?

BASSANIO  Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing,
more than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as
two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you
shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you
have them, they are not worth the search.

ANTONIO
Well, tell me now what lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
That you today promised to tell me of?

BASSANIO
'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
How much I have disabled mine estate
By something showing a more swelling port
Than my faint means would grant continuance.
Nor do I now make moan to be abridged
From such a noble rate. But my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio,
I owe the most in money and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

ANTONIO
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
Within the eye of honor, be assured
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all unlocked to your occasions.

BASSANIO
In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way with more advised watch
To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and, like a willful youth,
That which I owe is lost. But if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim, or to find both
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

ANTONIO
You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance;
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Than if you had made waste of all I have.
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am prest unto it. Therefore speak.

BASSANIO
In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages.
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued
To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia.
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
O my Antonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift
That I should questionless be fortunate!

ANTONIO
Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
Neither have I money nor commodity
To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth:
Try what my credit can in Venice do;
That shall be racked even to the uttermost
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently inquire, and so will I,
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Portia with her waiting woman Nerissa.]


PORTIA  By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary
of this great world.

NERISSA  You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries
were in the same abundance as your good fortunes
are. And yet, for aught I see, they are as sick that
surfeit with too much as they that starve with
nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be
seated in the mean. Superfluity comes sooner by
white hairs, but competency lives longer.

PORTIA  Good sentences, and well pronounced.

NERISSA  They would be better if well followed.

PORTIA  If to do were as easy as to know what were
good to do, chapels had been churches, and poor
men's cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine
that follows his own instructions. I can easier teach
twenty what were good to be done than to be one of
the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain
may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper
leaps o'er a cold decree: such a hare is madness the
youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the
cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
choose me a husband. O, me, the word "choose"! I
may neither choose who I would nor refuse who I
dislike. So is the will of a living daughter curbed by
the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that
I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?

NERISSA  Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men
at their death have good inspirations. Therefore the
lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of
gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his
meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be
chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly
love. But what warmth is there in your affection
towards any of these princely suitors that are already
come?

PORTIA  I pray thee, overname them, and as thou
namest them, I will describe them, and according
to my description level at my affection.

NERISSA  First, there is the Neapolitan prince.

PORTIA  Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but
talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation
to his own good parts that he can shoe him
himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother
played false with a smith.

NERISSA  Then is there the County Palatine.

PORTIA  He doth nothing but frown, as who should say
"An you will not have me, choose." He hears
merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the
weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so
full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had
rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in
his mouth than to either of these. God defend me
from these two!

NERISSA  How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le
Bon?

PORTIA  God made him, and therefore let him pass for
a man. In truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker,
but he!--why, he hath a horse better than the
Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of frowning than
the Count Palatine. He is every man in no man. If a
throstle sing, he falls straight a-cap'ring. He will
fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I
should marry twenty husbands! If he would despise
me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to
madness, I shall never requite him.

NERISSA  What say you then to Falconbridge, the young
baron of England?

PORTIA  You know I say nothing to him, for he understands
not me, nor I him. He hath neither Latin,
French, nor Italian; and you will come into the
court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in
the English. He is a proper man's picture, but alas,
who can converse with a dumb show? How oddly
he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy,
his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany,
and his behavior everywhere.

NERISSA  What think you of the Scottish lord, his
neighbor?

PORTIA  That he hath a neighborly charity in him, for
he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman,
and swore he would pay him again when he was
able. I think the Frenchman became his surety and
sealed under for another.

NERISSA  How like you the young German, the Duke of
Saxony's nephew?

PORTIA  Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober,
and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk.
When he is best he is a little worse than a man, and
when he is worst he is little better than a beast. An
the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift
to go without him.

NERISSA  If he should offer to choose, and choose the
right casket, you should refuse to perform your
father's will if you should refuse to accept him.

PORTIA  Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set
a deep glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary
casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation
without, I know he will choose it. I will do
anything, Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.

NERISSA  You need not fear, lady, the having any of
these lords. They have acquainted me with their
determinations, which is indeed to return to their
home and to trouble you with no more suit, unless
you may be won by some other sort than your
father's imposition depending on the caskets.

PORTIA  If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as
chaste as Diana unless I be obtained by the manner
of my father's will. I am glad this parcel of wooers
are so reasonable, for there is not one among them
but I dote on his very absence. And I pray God
grant them a fair departure!

NERISSA  Do you not remember, lady, in your father's
time, a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came
hither in company of the Marquess of Montferrat?

PORTIA  Yes, yes, it was Bassanio--as I think so was he
called.

NERISSA  True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my
foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a
fair lady.

PORTIA  I remember him well, and I remember him
worthy of thy praise.

[Enter a Servingman.]

How now, what news?

SERVINGMAN  The four strangers seek for you, madam,
to take their leave. And there is a forerunner come
from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings
word the Prince his master will be here tonight.

PORTIA  If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good
heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should
be glad of his approach. If he have the condition of
a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather
he should shrive me than wive me.
Come, Nerissa. [To Servingman.] Sirrah, go before.--
Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another
knocks at the door.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Bassanio with Shylock the Jew.]


SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats, well.

BASSANIO  Ay, sir, for three months.

SHYLOCK  For three months, well.

BASSANIO  For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall
be bound.

SHYLOCK  Antonio shall become bound, well.

BASSANIO  May you stead me? Will you pleasure me?
Shall I know your answer?

SHYLOCK  Three thousand ducats for three months,
and Antonio bound.

BASSANIO  Your answer to that?

SHYLOCK  Antonio is a good man.

BASSANIO  Have you heard any imputation to the
contrary?

SHYLOCK  Ho, no, no, no, no! My meaning in saying he
is a good man is to have you understand me that he
is sufficient. Yet his means are in supposition: he
hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the
Indies. I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto,
he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and
other ventures he hath squandered abroad. But
ships are but boards, sailors but men; there be land
rats and water rats, water thieves and land
thieves--I mean pirates--and then there is the
peril of waters, winds, and rocks. The man is,
notwithstanding, sufficient. Three thousand ducats.
I think I may take his bond.

BASSANIO  Be assured you may.

SHYLOCK  I will be assured I may. And that I may be
assured, I will bethink me. May I speak with
Antonio?

BASSANIO  If it please you to dine with us.

SHYLOCK  Yes, to smell pork! To eat of the habitation
which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the
devil into! I will buy with you, sell with you, talk
with you, walk with you, and so following; but I
will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with
you.--What news on the Rialto?--Who is he comes
here?

[Enter Antonio.]


BASSANIO  This is Signior Antonio.

SHYLOCK, [aside]
How like a fawning publican he looks!
I hate him for he is a Christian,
But more for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls "interest." Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him!

BASSANIO  Shylock, do you hear?

SHYLOCK
I am debating of my present store,
And, by the near guess of my memory,
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
Will furnish me. But soft, how many months
Do you desire? [To Antonio.] Rest you fair, good
signior!
Your Worship was the last man in our mouths.

ANTONIO
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking nor by giving of excess,
Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I'll break a custom. [To Bassanio.] Is he yet
possessed
How much you would?

SHYLOCK  Ay, ay, three thousand
ducats.

ANTONIO  And for three months.

SHYLOCK
I had forgot--three months. [To Bassanio.]
You told me so.--
Well then, your bond. And let me see--but hear
you:
Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

ANTONIO  I do never use it.

SHYLOCK
When Jacob grazed his Uncle Laban's sheep--
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
(As his wise mother wrought in his behalf)
The third possessor; ay, he was the third--

ANTONIO
And what of him? Did he take interest?

SHYLOCK
No, not take interest, not, as you would say,
Directly "interest." Mark what Jacob did.
When Laban and himself were compromised
That all the eanlings which were streaked and pied
Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes being rank
In end of autumn turned to the rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skillful shepherd pilled me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
Who then conceiving did in eaning time
Fall parti-colored lambs, and those were Jacob's.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

ANTONIO
This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interest good?
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?

SHYLOCK
I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
But note me, signior--

ANTONIO, [aside to Bassanio]
Mark you this, Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose!
An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!

SHYLOCK
Three thousand ducats. 'Tis a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see, the
rate--

ANTONIO
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?

SHYLOCK
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
In the Rialto you have rated me
About my moneys and my usances.
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug
(For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe).
You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to, then. You come to me and you say
"Shylock, we would have moneys"--you say so,
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold. Moneys is your suit.
What should I say to you? Should I not say
"Hath a dog money? Is it possible
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?" Or
Shall I bend low, and in a bondman's key,
With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
Say this: "Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday
last;
You spurned me such a day; another time
You called me 'dog'; and for these courtesies
I'll lend you thus much moneys"?

ANTONIO
I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee, too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed for barren metal of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face
Exact the penalty.

SHYLOCK  Why, look you how you storm!
I would be friends with you and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have stained me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doit
Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me!
This is kind I offer.

BASSANIO  This were kindness!

SHYLOCK  This kindness will I show.
Go with me to a notary, seal me there
Your single bond; and in a merry sport,
If you repay me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body pleaseth me.

ANTONIO
Content, in faith. I'll seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

BASSANIO
You shall not seal to such a bond for me!
I'll rather dwell in my necessity.

ANTONIO
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it!
Within these two months--that's a month before
This bond expires--I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

SHYLOCK
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others! Pray you tell me this:
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
To buy his favor I extend this friendship.
If he will take it, so. If not, adieu;
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.

ANTONIO
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.

SHYLOCK
Then meet me forthwith at the notary's.
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
I'll be with you.

ANTONIO  Hie thee, gentle Jew.
[Shylock exits.]
The Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind.

BASSANIO
I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.

ANTONIO
Come on, in this there can be no dismay;
My ships come home a month before the day.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Prince of Morocco, a tawny Moor all in
white, and three or four followers accordingly, with
Portia, Nerissa, and their train.]


MOROCCO
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnished sun,
To whom I am a neighbor and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
And let us make incision for your love
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
Hath feared the valiant; by my love I swear
The best regarded virgins of our clime
Have loved it too. I would not change this hue
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.

PORTIA
In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
But if my father had not scanted me
And hedged me by his wit to yield myself
His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
Yourself, renowned prince, then stood as fair
As any comer I have looked on yet
For my affection.

MOROCCO  Even for that I thank you.
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets
To try my fortune. By this scimitar
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look,
Outbrave the heart most daring on the Earth,
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
Yea, mock the lion when he roars for prey,
To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand;
So is Alcides beaten by his page,
And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
And die with grieving.

PORTIA  You must take your chance
And either not attempt to choose at all
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to lady afterward
In way of marriage. Therefore be advised.

MOROCCO
Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.

PORTIA
First, forward to the temple. After dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

MOROCCO  Good fortune then,
To make me blest--or cursed'st among men!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lancelet Gobbo the Clown, alone.]


LANCELET  Certainly my conscience will serve me to
run from this Jew my master. The fiend is at mine
elbow and tempts me, saying to me "Gobbo,
Lancelet Gobbo, good Lancelet," or "good Gobbo,"
or "good Lancelet Gobbo, use your legs, take
the start, run away." My conscience says "No. Take
heed, honest Lancelet, take heed, honest Gobbo,"
or, as aforesaid, "honest Lancelet Gobbo, do not
run; scorn running with thy heels." Well, the most
courageous fiend bids me pack. "Fia!" says the
fiend. "Away!" says the fiend. "For the heavens,
rouse up a brave mind," says the fiend, "and run!"
Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my
heart, says very wisely to me "My honest friend
Lancelet, being an honest man's son"--or rather,
an honest woman's son, for indeed my father did
something smack, something grow to--he had a
kind of taste--well, my conscience says "Lancelet,
budge not." "Budge," says the fiend. "Budge not,"
says my conscience. "Conscience," say I, "you
counsel well." "Fiend," say I, "you counsel well."
To be ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the
Jew my master, who (God bless the mark) is a kind
of devil; and to run away from the Jew, I should be
ruled by the fiend, who (saving your reverence) is
the devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil
incarnation, and, in my conscience, my conscience
is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel
me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more
friendly counsel. I will run, fiend. My heels are at
your commandment. I will run.

[Enter old Gobbo with a basket.]


GOBBO  Master young man, you, I pray you, which is
the way to Master Jew's?

LANCELET, [aside]  O heavens, this is my true begotten
father, who being more than sandblind, high gravelblind,
knows me not. I will try confusions with him.

GOBBO  Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is
the way to Master Jew's?

LANCELET  Turn up on your right hand at the next
turning, but at the next turning of all on your left;
marry, at the very next turning, turn of no hand,
but turn down indirectly to the Jew's house.

GOBBO  Be God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit.
Can you tell me whether one Lancelet, that dwells
with him, dwell with him or no?

LANCELET  Talk you of young Master Lancelet? [Aside.]
Mark me now, now will I raise the waters.--Talk
you of young Master Lancelet?

GOBBO  No master, sir, but a poor man's son. His
father, though I say 't, is an honest exceeding poor
man and, God be thanked, well to live.

LANCELET  Well, let his father be what he will, we talk
of young Master Lancelet.

GOBBO  Your Worship's friend, and Lancelet, sir.

LANCELET  But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech
you, talk you of young Master Lancelet?

GOBBO  Of Lancelet, an 't please your mastership.

LANCELET  Ergo, Master Lancelet. Talk not of Master
Lancelet, father, for the young gentleman, according
to Fates and Destinies, and such odd sayings, the
Sisters Three, and such branches of learning, is
indeed deceased, or, as you would say in plain
terms, gone to heaven.

GOBBO  Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff
of my age, my very prop.

LANCELET, [aside]  Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post,
a staff or a prop?--Do you know me, father?

GOBBO  Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman.
But I pray you tell me, is my boy, God rest his
soul, alive or dead?

LANCELET  Do you not know me, father?

GOBBO  Alack, sir, I am sandblind. I know you not.

LANCELET  Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might
fail of the knowing me. It is a wise father that
knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you
news of your son. [He kneels.] Give me your blessing.
Truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid
long--a man's son may, but in the end, truth will
out.

GOBBO  Pray you, sir, stand up! I am sure you are not
Lancelet my boy.

LANCELET  Pray you, let's have no more fooling about
it, but give me your blessing. I am Lancelet, your
boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall
be.

GOBBO  I cannot think you are my son.

LANCELET  I know not what I shall think of that; but I
am Lancelet, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery
your wife is my mother.

GOBBO  Her name is Margery, indeed. I'll be sworn if
thou be Lancelet, thou art mine own flesh and
blood. Lord worshiped might He be, what a beard
hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair on thy chin
than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.

LANCELET, [standing up]  It should seem, then, that
Dobbin's tail grows backward. I am sure he had
more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I
last saw him.

GOBBO  Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou
and thy master agree? I have brought him a present.
How 'gree you now?

LANCELET  Well, well. But for mine own part, as I have
set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I
have run some ground. My master's a very Jew.
Give him a present! Give him a halter. I am
famished in his service. You may tell every finger I
have with my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come!
Give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who
indeed gives rare new liveries. If I serve not him, I
will run as far as God has any ground. O rare
fortune, here comes the man! To him, father, for I
am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.

[Enter Bassanio with Leonardo and a follower or two.]


BASSANIO, [to an Attendant]  You may do so, but let it be
so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five
of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the
liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come
anon to my lodging.	[The Attendant exits.]

LANCELET  To him, father.

GOBBO, [to Bassanio]  God bless your Worship.

BASSANIO  Gramercy. Wouldst thou aught with me?

GOBBO  Here's my son, sir, a poor boy--

LANCELET  Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man,
that would, sir, as my father shall specify--

GOBBO  He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say,
to serve--

LANCELET  Indeed, the short and the long is, I serve the
Jew, and have a desire, as my father shall specify--

GOBBO  His master and he (saving your Worship's
reverence) are scarce cater-cousins--

LANCELET  To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew,
having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my
father being, I hope, an old man, shall frutify unto
you--

GOBBO  I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow
upon your Worship, and my suit is--

LANCELET  In very brief, the suit is impertinent to
myself, as your Worship shall know by this honest
old man, and though I say it, though old man yet
poor man, my father--

BASSANIO  One speak for both. What would you?

LANCELET  Serve you, sir.

GOBBO  That is the very defect of the matter, sir.

BASSANIO, [to Lancelet]
I know thee well. Thou hast obtained thy suit.
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jew's service, to become
The follower of so poor a gentleman.

LANCELET  The old proverb is very well parted between
my master Shylock and you, sir: you have "the
grace of God," sir, and he hath "enough."

BASSANIO
Thou speak'st it well.--Go, father, with thy son.--
Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
My lodging out. [To an Attendant.] Give him a livery
More guarded than his fellows'. See it done.
[Attendant exits. Bassanio and Leonardo talk apart.]

LANCELET  Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have
ne'er a tongue in my head! Well, [studying his palm]
if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth
offer to swear upon a book--I shall have good
fortune, go to! Here's a simple line of life. Here's a
small trifle of wives--alas, fifteen wives is nothing;
eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in
for one man--and then to 'scape drowning
thrice, and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a
featherbed! Here are simple 'scapes. Well, if Fortune
be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear.
Father, come. I'll take my leave of the Jew in the
twinkling.	[Lancelet and old Gobbo exit.]

BASSANIO
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
[Handing him a paper.]
These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight
My best esteemed acquaintance. Hie thee, go.

LEONARDO
My best endeavors shall be done herein.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO, [to Leonardo]  Where's your master?

LEONARDO  Yonder, sir, he walks.	[Leonardo exits.]

GRATIANO  Signior Bassanio!

BASSANIO  Gratiano!

GRATIANO  I have suit to you.

BASSANIO  You have obtained it.

GRATIANO  You must not deny me. I must go with you
to Belmont.

BASSANIO
Why then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano,
Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice--
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults.
But where thou art not known--why, there they
show
Something too liberal. Pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior
I be misconstered in the place I go to,
And lose my hopes.

GRATIANO  Signior Bassanio, hear me.
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say "amen,"
Use all the observance of civility
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his grandam, never trust me more.

BASSANIO  Well, we shall see your bearing.

GRATIANO
Nay, but I bar tonight. You shall not gauge me
By what we do tonight.

BASSANIO  No, that were pity.
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment. But fare you well.
I have some business.

GRATIANO
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest.
But we will visit you at supper time.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Jessica and Lancelet Gobbo.]


JESSICA
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
Our house is hell and thou, a merry devil,
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
But fare thee well. There is a ducat for thee,
And, Lancelet, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest.
Give him this letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell. I would not have my father
See me in talk with thee.

LANCELET  Adieu. Tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful
pagan, most sweet Jew. If a Christian do not
play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.
But adieu. These foolish drops do something drown
my manly spirit. Adieu.

JESSICA  Farewell, good Lancelet.
[Lancelet exits.]
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my father's child?
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
[She exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Gratiano, Lorenzo, Salarino, and Solanio.]


LORENZO
Nay, we will slink away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return
All in an hour.

GRATIANO
We have not made good preparation.

SALARINO
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.

SOLANIO
'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.

LORENZO
'Tis now but four o'clock. We have two hours
To furnish us.

[Enter Lancelet.]

Friend Lancelet, what's the news?

LANCELET  An it shall please you to break up this, it
shall seem to signify.	[Handing him Jessica's letter.]

LORENZO
I know the hand; in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
And whiter than the paper it writ on
Is the fair hand that writ.

GRATIANO  Love news, in faith!

LANCELET  By your leave, sir.

LORENZO  Whither goest thou?

LANCELET  Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to
sup tonight with my new master the Christian.

LORENZO
Hold here, take this. [Giving him money.] Tell gentle
Jessica
I will not fail her. Speak it privately.
[Lancelet exits.]
Go, gentlemen,
Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
I am provided of a torchbearer.

SALARINO
Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.

SOLANIO
And so will I.

LORENZO  Meet me and Gratiano
At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.

SALARINO  'Tis good we do so.
[Salarino and Solanio exit.]

GRATIANO
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?

LORENZO
I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
How I shall take her from her father's house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What page's suit she hath in readiness.
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
Come, go with me. Peruse this as thou goest;
[Handing him the letter.]
Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Shylock, the Jew, and Lancelet,
his man that was, the Clown.]


SHYLOCK
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.--
What, Jessica!--Thou shalt not gormandize
As thou hast done with me--what, Jessica!--
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.--
Why, Jessica, I say!

LANCELET  Why, Jessica!

SHYLOCK
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.

LANCELET  Your Worship was wont to tell me I could
do nothing without bidding.

[Enter Jessica.]


JESSICA  Call you? What is your will?

SHYLOCK
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica.
There are my keys.--But wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love. They flatter me.
But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian.--Jessica, my girl,
Look to my house.--I am right loath to go.
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
For I did dream of money bags tonight.

LANCELET  I beseech you, sir, go. My young master
doth expect your reproach.

SHYLOCK  So do I his.

LANCELET  And they have conspired together--I will
not say you shall see a masque, but if you do, then it
was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on
Black Monday last, at six o'clock i' th' morning,
falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four
year in th' afternoon.

SHYLOCK
What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces,
But stop my house's ears (I mean my casements).
Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
My sober house. By Jacob's staff I swear
I have no mind of feasting forth tonight.
But I will go.--Go you before me, sirrah.
Say I will come.

LANCELET  I will go before, sir. [Aside to Jessica.] Mistress,
look out at window for all this.
There will come a Christian by
Will be worth a Jewess' eye.	[He exits.]

SHYLOCK
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?

JESSICA
His words were "Farewell, mistress," nothing else.

SHYLOCK
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
More than the wildcat. Drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in.
Perhaps I will return immediately.
Do as I bid you. Shut doors after you.
Fast bind, fast find--
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.	[He exits.]

JESSICA
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a father, you a daughter, lost.
[She exits.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter the masquers, Gratiano and Salarino.]


GRATIANO
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make stand.

SALARINO  His hour is almost past.

GRATIANO
And it is marvel he outdwells his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

SALARINO
O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly
To seal love's bonds new-made than they are wont
To keep obliged faith unforfeited.

GRATIANO
That ever holds. Who riseth from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that doth untread again
His tedious measures with the unbated fire
That he did pace them first? All things that are,
Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hugged and embraced by the strumpet wind;
How like the prodigal doth she return
With overweathered ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!

[Enter Lorenzo.]


SALARINO
Here comes Lorenzo. More of this hereafter.

LORENZO
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode.
Not I but my affairs have made you wait.
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
I'll watch as long for you then. Approach.
Here dwells my father Jew.--Ho! Who's within?

[Enter Jessica above, dressed as a boy.]


JESSICA
Who are you? Tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.

LORENZO  Lorenzo, and thy love.

JESSICA
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? And now who knows
But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?

LORENZO
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

JESSICA
Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
For I am much ashamed of my exchange.
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.

LORENZO
Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.

JESSICA
What, must I hold a candle to my shames?
They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
And I should be obscured.

LORENZO  So are you, sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
But come at once,
For the close night doth play the runaway,
And we are stayed for at Bassanio's feast.

JESSICA
I will make fast the doors and gild myself
With some more ducats, and be with you straight.
[Jessica exits, above.]

GRATIANO
Now, by my hood, a gentle and no Jew!

LORENZO
Beshrew me but I love her heartily,
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath proved herself.
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

[Enter Jessica, below.]

What, art thou come? On, gentleman, away!
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
[All but Gratiano exit.]

[Enter Antonio.]


ANTONIO  Who's there?

GRATIANO  Signior Antonio?

ANTONIO
Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
'Tis nine o'clock! Our friends all stay for you.
No masque tonight; the wind is come about;
Bassanio presently will go aboard.
I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

GRATIANO
I am glad on 't. I desire no more delight
Than to be under sail and gone tonight.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Portia with the Prince of Morocco and both
their trains.]


PORTIA
Go, draw aside the curtains and discover
The several caskets to this noble prince.
[A curtain is drawn.]
Now make your choice.

MOROCCO
This first, of gold, who this inscription bears,
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire";
The second, silver, which this promise carries,
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves";
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
How shall I know if I do choose the right?

PORTIA
The one of them contains my picture, prince.
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

MOROCCO
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see.
I will survey th' inscriptions back again.
What says this leaden casket?
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
Must give--for what? For lead? Hazard for lead?
This casket threatens. Men that hazard all
Do it in hope of fair advantages.
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross.
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
What says the silver with her virgin hue?
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
As much as he deserves--pause there, Morocco,
And weigh thy value with an even hand.
If thou beest rated by thy estimation,
Thou dost deserve enough; and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the lady.
And yet to be afeard of my deserving
Were but a weak disabling of myself.
As much as I deserve--why, that's the lady!
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding,
But more than these, in love I do deserve.
What if I strayed no farther, but chose here?
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold:
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire."
Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her.
From the four corners of the Earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal, breathing saint.
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
For princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As o'er a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is 't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
To think so base a thought. It were too gross
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
Or shall I think in silver she's immured,
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
O, sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an angel
Stamped in gold, but that's insculped upon;
But here an angel in a golden bed
Lies all within.--Deliver me the key.
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

PORTIA
There, take it, prince. [Handing him the key.] And if
my form lie there,
Then I am yours.
	[Morocco opens the gold casket.]

MOROCCO  O hell! What have we here?
A carrion death within whose empty eye
There is a written scroll. I'll read the writing:
	All that glisters is not gold--
	Often have you heard that told.
	Many a man his life hath sold
	But my outside to behold.
	Gilded tombs do worms infold.
	Had you been as wise as bold,
	Young in limbs, in judgment old,
	Your answer had not been enscrolled.
	Fare you well, your suit is cold.
Cold indeed and labor lost!
Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost.
Portia, adieu. I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.
[He exits, with his train.]

PORTIA
A gentle riddance! Draw the curtains, go.
Let all of his complexion choose me so.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Salarino and Solanio.]


SALARINO
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

SOLANIO
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.

SALARINO
He came too late; the ship was under sail.
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a gondola were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica.
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

SOLANIO
I never heard a passion so confused,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
"My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter,
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter,
And jewels--two stones, two rich and precious
stones--
Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl!
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats."

SALARINO
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying "His stones, his daughter, and his ducats."

SOLANIO
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.

SALARINO  Marry, well remembered.
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday
Who told me, in the Narrow Seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught.
I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
And wished in silence that it were not his.

SOLANIO
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear--
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

SALARINO
A kinder gentleman treads not the Earth.
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part.
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return. He answered "Do not so.
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time;
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love.
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there."
And even there, his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanio's hand--and so they parted.

SOLANIO
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.

SALARINO  Do we so.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter Nerissa and a Servitor.]


NERISSA
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight.
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath
And comes to his election presently.

[Enter the Prince of Arragon, his train, and Portia.]


PORTIA
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince.
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized.
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

ARRAGON
I am enjoined by oath to observe three things:
First, never to unfold to anyone
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage;
Lastly, if I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.

PORTIA
To these injunctions everyone doth swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

ARRAGON
And so have I addressed me. Fortune now
To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
"Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he
hath."
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see:
"Who chooseth me shall gain what many men
desire."
What many men desire--that "many" may be
meant
By the fool multitude that choose by show,
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach,
Which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and road of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not jump with common spirits
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why, then, to thee, thou silver treasure house.
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
And well said, too; for who shall go about
To cozen fortune and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an undeserved dignity.
O, that estates, degrees, and offices
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? And how much honor
Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times,
To be new varnished? Well, but to my choice.
"Who chooseth me shall get as much as he
deserves."
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
[He is given a key.]
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
[He opens the silver casket.]

PORTIA
Too long a pause for that which you find there.

ARRAGON
What's here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.--
How much unlike art thou to Portia!
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings.
"Who chooseth me shall have as much as he
deserves"?
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?

PORTIA
To offend and judge are distinct offices
And of opposed natures.

ARRAGON  What is here?
[He reads.]

	The fire seven times tried this;
	Seven times tried that judgment is
	That did never choose amiss.
	Some there be that shadows kiss;
	Such have but a shadow's bliss.
	There be fools alive, iwis,
	Silvered o'er--and so was this.
	Take what wife you will to bed,
	I will ever be your head.
	So begone; you are sped.
Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here.
With one fool's head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet, adieu. I'll keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroth.	[He exits with his train.]

PORTIA
Thus hath the candle singed the moth.
O, these deliberate fools, when they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

NERISSA
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.

PORTIA  Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

[Enter Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Where is my lady?

PORTIA  Here. What would my
lord?

MESSENGER
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify th' approaching of his lord,
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath),
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet,
To show how costly summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

PORTIA
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him!
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.

NERISSA
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Solanio and Salarino.]


SOLANIO  Now, what news on the Rialto?

SALARINO  Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio
hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the
Narrow Seas--the Goodwins, I think they call the
place--a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the
carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say,
if my gossip Report be an honest woman of her
word.

SOLANIO  I would she were as lying a gossip in that as
ever knapped ginger or made her neighbors believe
she wept for the death of a third husband. But
it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing
the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio,
the honest Antonio--O, that I had a title good
enough to keep his name company!--

SALARINO  Come, the full stop.

SOLANIO  Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he
hath lost a ship.

SALARINO  I would it might prove the end of his losses.

SOLANIO  Let me say "amen" betimes, lest the devil
cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness
of a Jew.

[Enter Shylock.]

How now, Shylock, what news among the
merchants?

SHYLOCK  You knew, none so well, none so well as you,
of my daughter's flight.

SALARINO  That's certain. I for my part knew the tailor
that made the wings she flew withal.

SOLANIO  And Shylock for his own part knew the bird
was fledge, and then it is the complexion of them
all to leave the dam.

SHYLOCK  She is damned for it.

SALARINO  That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.

SHYLOCK  My own flesh and blood to rebel!

SOLANIO  Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these
years?

SHYLOCK  I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.

SALARINO  There is more difference between thy flesh
and hers than between jet and ivory, more between
your bloods than there is between red wine and
Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio
have had any loss at sea or no?

SHYLOCK  There I have another bad match! A bankrout,
a prodigal, who dare scarce show his head on
the Rialto, a beggar that was used to come so smug
upon the mart! Let him look to his bond. He was
wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. He
was wont to lend money for a Christian cur'sy; let
him look to his bond.

SALARINO  Why, I am sure if he forfeit, thou wilt not
take his flesh! What's that good for?

SHYLOCK  To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else,
it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me and
hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses,
mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted
my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies--
and what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath not
a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions,
senses, affections, passions? Fed with the
same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to
the same diseases, healed by the same means,
warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer
as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not
bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you
poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall
we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will
resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian,
what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian wrong
a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian
example? Why, revenge! The villainy you teach me I
will execute, and it shall go hard but I will better the
instruction.

[Enter a man from Antonio.]


SERVINGMAN  Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his
house and desires to speak with you both.

SALARINO  We have been up and down to seek him.

[Enter Tubal.]


SOLANIO  Here comes another of the tribe; a third
cannot be matched unless the devil himself turn
Jew.
[Salarino, Solanio, and the Servingman exit.]

SHYLOCK  How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa?
Hast thou found my daughter?

TUBAL  I often came where I did hear of her, but
cannot find her.

SHYLOCK  Why, there, there, there, there! A diamond
gone cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfurt!
The curse never fell upon our nation till now, I
never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in that,
and other precious, precious jewels! I would my
daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her
ear; would she were hearsed at my foot and the
ducats in her coffin. No news of them? Why so? And
I know not what's spent in the search! Why, thou
loss upon loss! The thief gone with so much, and so
much to find the thief, and no satisfaction, no
revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights a' my
shoulders, no sighs but a' my breathing, no tears but
a' my shedding.

TUBAL  Yes, other men have ill luck, too. Antonio, as I
heard in Genoa--

SHYLOCK  What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?

TUBAL  --hath an argosy cast away coming from
Tripolis.

SHYLOCK  I thank God, I thank God! Is it true, is it true?

TUBAL  I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped
the wrack.

SHYLOCK  I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good
news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa--

TUBAL  Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one
night fourscore ducats.

SHYLOCK  Thou stick'st a dagger in me. I shall never
see my gold again. Fourscore ducats at a sitting,
fourscore ducats!

TUBAL  There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my
company to Venice that swear he cannot choose
but break.

SHYLOCK  I am very glad of it. I'll plague him, I'll
torture him. I am glad of it.

TUBAL  One of them showed me a ring that he had of
your daughter for a monkey.

SHYLOCK  Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It
was my turquoise! I had it of Leah when I was a
bachelor. I would not have given it for a wilderness
of monkeys.

TUBAL  But Antonio is certainly undone.

SHYLOCK  Nay, that's true, that's very true. Go, Tubal,
fee me an officer. Bespeak him a fortnight before. I
will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he
out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will.
Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good
Tubal, at our synagogue, Tubal.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bassanio, Portia, and all their trains, Gratiano,
Nerissa.]


PORTIA
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
There's something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you, and you know yourself
Hate counsels not in such a quality.
But lest you should not understand me well
(And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought)
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn.
So will I never be. So may you miss me.
But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o'erlooked me and divided me.
One half of me is yours, the other half yours--
Mine own, I would say--but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours. O, these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights!
And so though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
To eche it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

BASSANIO  Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

PORTIA
Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

BASSANIO
None but that ugly treason of mistrust,
Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love.
There may as well be amity and life
'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.

PORTIA
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack
Where men enforced do speak anything.

BASSANIO
Promise me life and I'll confess the truth.

PORTIA
Well, then, confess and live.

BASSANIO  "Confess and love"
Had been the very sum of my confession.
O happy torment, when my torturer
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

PORTIA
Away, then. I am locked in one of them.
If you do love me, you will find me out.--
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof.
Let music sound while he doth make his choice.
Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And wat'ry deathbed for him. He may win,
And what is music then? Then music is
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
To a new-crowned monarch. Such it is
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
With no less presence but with much more love
Than young Alcides when he did redeem
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
With bleared visages, come forth to view
The issue of th' exploit. Go, Hercules!
Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray.

[A song the whilst Bassanio comments on
the caskets to himself.]



	Tell me where is fancy bred,
	Or in the heart, or in the head?
	How begot, how nourished?
	   Reply, reply.
	It is engendered in the eye,
	With gazing fed, and fancy dies
	In the cradle where it lies.
	Let us all ring fancy's knell.
	I'll begin it.--Ding, dong, bell.

ALL	Ding, dong, bell.

BASSANIO
So may the outward shows be least themselves;
The world is still deceived with ornament.
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
But, being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
What damned error but some sober brow
Will bless it and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
There is no vice so simple but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
How many cowards whose hearts are all as false
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward searched have livers white as milk,
And these assume but valor's excrement
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it.
So are those crisped snaky golden locks,
Which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The skull that bred them in the sepulcher.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore, then, thou gaudy
gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee.
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
'Tween man and man. But thou, thou meager lead,
Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence,
And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
[Bassanio is given a key.]

PORTIA, [aside]
How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts and rash embraced despair,
And shudd'ring fear, and green-eyed jealousy!
O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!
I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less,
For fear I surfeit.
[Bassanio opens the lead casket.]

BASSANIO  What find I here?
Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demigod
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine,
Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips
Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes!
How could he see to do them? Having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
In underprizing it, so far this shadow
Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
The continent and summary of my fortune.
[He reads the scroll.]
	You that choose not by the view
	Chance as fair and choose as true.
	Since this fortune falls to you,
	Be content and seek no new.
	If you be well pleased with this
	And hold your fortune for your bliss,
	Turn you where your lady is,
	And claim her with a loving kiss.
A gentle scroll! Fair lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give and to receive.
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes,
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peals of praise be his or no,
So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.

PORTIA
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
Such as I am. Though for myself alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish
To wish myself much better, yet for you
I would be trebled twenty times myself,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich, that only to stand high in your account
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account. But the full sum of me
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross,
Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticed;
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn; happier than this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits itself to yours to be directed
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours, my lord's. I give them with this ring,
[Handing him a ring.]
Which, when you part from, lose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

BASSANIO
Madam, you have bereft me of all words.
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved prince there doth appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!

NERISSA
My lord and lady, it is now our time,
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry "Good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!"

GRATIANO
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
For I am sure you can wish none from me.
And when your honors mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.

BASSANIO
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.

GRATIANO
I thank your Lordship, you have got me one.
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid.
You loved, I loved; for intermission
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine, too, as the matter falls.
For wooing here until I sweat again,
And swearing till my very roof was dry
With oaths of love, at last (if promise last)
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love, provided that your fortune
Achieved her mistress.

PORTIA  Is this true, Nerissa?

NERISSA
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.

BASSANIO
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?

GRATIANO  Yes, faith, my lord.

BASSANIO
Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.

GRATIANO  We'll play with them the first boy for a
thousand ducats.

NERISSA  What, and stake down?

GRATIANO  No, we shall ne'er win at that sport and
stake down.

[Enter Lorenzo, Jessica, and Salerio, a messenger
from Venice.]

But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?

BASSANIO
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither--
If that the youth of my new int'rest here
Have power to bid you welcome. [To Portia.] By
your leave,
I bid my very friends and countrymen,
Sweet Portia, welcome.

PORTIA
So do I, my lord. They are entirely welcome.

LORENZO, [to Bassanio]
I thank your Honor. For my part, my lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay
To come with him along.

SALERIO  I did, my lord,
And I have reason for it.	[Handing him a paper.]
Signior Antonio
Commends him to you.

BASSANIO  Ere I ope his letter,
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.

SALERIO
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there
Will show you his estate.
[Bassanio opens the letter.]

GRATIANO
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.--
Your hand, Salerio. What's the news from Venice?
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
I know he will be glad of our success.
We are the Jasons, we have won the Fleece.

SALERIO
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.

PORTIA
There are some shrewd contents in yond same
paper
That steals the color from Bassanio's cheek.
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?--
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself,
And I must freely have the half of anything
That this same paper brings you.

BASSANIO  O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady,
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins: I was a gentleman.
And then I told you true; and yet, dear lady,
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a braggart. When I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
I have engaged myself to a dear friend,
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life blood.--But is it true, Salerio?
Hath all his ventures failed? What, not one hit?
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch
Of merchant-marring rocks?

SALERIO  Not one, my lord.
Besides, it should appear that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it. Never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

JESSICA
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
Than twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him. And I know, my lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Antonio.

PORTIA
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?

BASSANIO
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best conditioned and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies, and one in whom
The ancient Roman honor more appears
Than any that draws breath in Italy.

PORTIA  What sum owes he the Jew?

BASSANIO
For me, three thousand ducats.

PORTIA  What, no more?
Pay him six thousand and deface the bond.
Double six thousand and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
First go with me to church and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend!
For never shall you lie by Portia's side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
Will live as maids and widows. Come, away,
For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.

BASSANIO [reads]
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my
creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to
the Jew is forfeit, and since in paying it, it is impossible
I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if
I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use
your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to
come, let not my letter.

PORTIA
O love, dispatch all business and begone!

BASSANIO
Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make haste. But till I come again,
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Shylock, the Jew, and Solanio, and Antonio,
and the Jailer.]


SHYLOCK
Jailer, look to him. Tell not me of mercy.
This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
Jailer, look to him.

ANTONIO  Hear me yet, good Shylock--

SHYLOCK
I'll have my bond. Speak not against my bond.
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs.
The Duke shall grant me justice.--I do wonder,
Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.

ANTONIO  I pray thee, hear me speak--

SHYLOCK
I'll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak.
I'll have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors. Follow not!
I'll have no speaking. I will have my bond.	[He exits.]

SOLANIO
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.

ANTONIO  Let him alone.
I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers.
He seeks my life. His reason well I know:
I oft delivered from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me.
Therefore he hates me.

SOLANIO  I am sure the Duke
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.

ANTONIO
The Duke cannot deny the course of law,
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
Will much impeach the justice of the state,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore go.
These griefs and losses have so bated me
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.--
Well, jailer, on.--Pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Portia, Nerissa, Lorenzo, Jessica, and Balthazar,
a man of Portia's.]


LORENZO
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
How true a gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Than customary bounty can enforce you.

PORTIA
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now; for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Antonio,
Being the bosom lover of my lord,
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul
From out the state of hellish cruelty!
This comes too near the praising of myself;
Therefore no more of it. Hear other things:
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
The husbandry and manage of my house
Until my lord's return. For mine own part,
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerissa here,
Until her husband and my lord's return.
There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.

LORENZO  Madam, with all my heart.
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

PORTIA
My people do already know my mind
And will acknowledge you and Jessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
So fare you well till we shall meet again.

LORENZO
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!

JESSICA
I wish your Ladyship all heart's content.

PORTIA
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased
To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.
[Lorenzo and Jessica exit.]
Now, Balthazar,
As I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: take this same letter,
And use thou all th' endeavor of a man
In speed to Padua. See thou render this
Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario.
[She gives him a paper.]
And look what notes and garments he doth give
thee,
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed
Unto the traject, to the common ferry
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.

BALTHAZAR
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.	[He exits.]

PORTIA
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of. We'll see our husbands
Before they think of us.

NERISSA  Shall they see us?

PORTIA
They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager,
When we are both accoutered like young men,
I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride, and speak of frays
Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies
How honorable ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died--
I could not do withal!--then I'll repent,
And wish, for all that, that I had not killed them.
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks
Which I will practice.

NERISSA  Why, shall we turn to men?

PORTIA  Fie, what a question's that,
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles today.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lancelet, the Clown, and Jessica.]


LANCELET  Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father
are to be laid upon the children. Therefore I
promise you I fear you. I was always plain with you,
and so now I speak my agitation of the matter.
Therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you
are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do
you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope
neither.

JESSICA  And what hope is that, I pray thee?

LANCELET  Marry, you may partly hope that your father
got you not, that you are not the Jew's daughter.

JESSICA  That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so
the sins of my mother should be visited upon me!

LANCELET  Truly, then, I fear you are damned both by
father and mother; thus when I shun Scylla your
father, I fall into Charybdis your mother. Well, you
are gone both ways.

JESSICA  I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made
me a Christian.

LANCELET  Truly the more to blame he! We were Christians
enow before, e'en as many as could well live
one by another. This making of Christians will
raise the price of hogs. If we grow all to be pork
eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the
coals for money.

[Enter Lorenzo.]


JESSICA  I'll tell my husband, Lancelet, what you say.
Here he comes.

LORENZO  I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Lancelet,
if you thus get my wife into corners!

JESSICA  Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Lancelet
and I are out. He tells me flatly there's no mercy for
me in heaven because I am a Jew's daughter; and
he says you are no good member of the commonwealth,
for in converting Jews to Christians you
raise the price of pork.

LORENZO  I shall answer that better to the commonwealth
than you can the getting up of the Negro's
belly! The Moor is with child by you, Lancelet.

LANCELET  It is much that the Moor should be more
than reason; but if she be less than an honest
woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

LORENZO  How every fool can play upon the word! I
think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into
silence, and discourse grow commendable in none
only but parrots. Go in, sirrah, bid them prepare for
dinner.

LANCELET  That is done, sir. They have all stomachs.

LORENZO  Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you!
Then bid them prepare dinner.

LANCELET  That is done too, sir, only "cover" is the
word.

LORENZO  Will you cover, then, sir?

LANCELET  Not so, sir, neither! I know my duty.

LORENZO  Yet more quarreling with occasion! Wilt
thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an
instant? I pray thee understand a plain man in his
plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the
table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to
dinner.

LANCELET  For the table, sir, it shall be served in; for
the meat, sir, it shall be covered; for your coming in
to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humors and conceits
shall govern.	[Lancelet exits.]

LORENZO
O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
The fool hath planted in his memory
An army of good words, and I do know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word
Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?

JESSICA
Past all expressing. It is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
For having such a blessing in his lady
He finds the joys of heaven here on Earth,
And if on Earth he do not merit it,
In reason he should never come to heaven.
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one, there must be something else
Pawned with the other, for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.

LORENZO  Even such a husband
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

JESSICA
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that!

LORENZO
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.

JESSICA
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach!

LORENZO
No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk.
Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
I shall digest it.

JESSICA  Well, I'll set you forth.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter the Duke, the Magnificoes, Antonio, Bassanio,
Salerio, and Gratiano, with Attendants.]


DUKE  What, is Antonio here?

ANTONIO  Ready, so please your Grace.

DUKE
I am sorry for thee. Thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,
Uncapable of pity, void and empty
From any dram of mercy.

ANTONIO  I have heard
Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit
The very tyranny and rage of his.

DUKE
Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.

SALERIO
He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.

[Enter Shylock.]


DUKE
Make room, and let him stand before our face.--
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then, 'tis thought,
Thou 'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exacts the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But, touched with humane gentleness and love,
Forgive a moi'ty of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so huddled on his back,
Enow to press a royal merchant down
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
From stubborn Turks, and Tartars never trained
To offices of tender courtesy.
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.

SHYLOCK
I have possessed your Grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your charter and your city's freedom!
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that,
But say it is my humor. Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats
To have it baned? What, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig,
Some that are mad if they behold a cat,
And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,
Cannot contain their urine; for affection
Masters oft passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes. Now for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig,
Why he a harmless necessary cat,
Why he a woolen bagpipe, but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame
As to offend, himself being offended,
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing
I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
A losing suit against him. Are you answered?

BASSANIO
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

SHYLOCK
I am not bound to please thee with my answers.

BASSANIO
Do all men kill the things they do not love?

SHYLOCK
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?

BASSANIO
Every offence is not a hate at first.

SHYLOCK
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?

ANTONIO, [to Bassanio]
I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
You may as well go stand upon the beach
And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
You may as well use question with the wolf
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
You may as well forbid the mountain pines
To wag their high tops and to make no noise
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
You may as well do anything most hard
As seek to soften that than which what's harder?--
His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conveniency
Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.

BASSANIO
For thy three thousand ducats here is six.

SHYLOCK
If every ducat in six thousand ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
I would not draw them. I would have my bond.

DUKE
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?

SHYLOCK
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you
"Let them be free! Marry them to your heirs!
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
Be seasoned with such viands"? You will answer
"The slaves are ours!" So do I answer you:
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought; 'tis mine and I will have it.
If you deny me, fie upon your law:
There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
I stand for judgment. Answer: shall I have it?

DUKE
Upon my power I may dismiss this court
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here today.

SALERIO  My lord, here stays without
A messenger with letters from the doctor,
New come from Padua.

DUKE
Bring us the letters. Call the messenger.

BASSANIO
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood!

ANTONIO
I am a tainted wether of the flock,
Meetest for death. The weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
You cannot better be employed, Bassanio,
Than to live still and write mine epitaph.

[Enter Nerissa, disguised as a lawyer's clerk.]


DUKE
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?

NERISSA, [as Clerk]
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
[Handing him a paper, which he reads, aside, while
Shylock sharpens his knife on the sole of his shoe.]

BASSANIO
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?

SHYLOCK
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there.

GRATIANO
Not on thy sole but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
Thou mak'st thy knife keen. But no metal can,
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?

SHYLOCK
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.

GRATIANO
O, be thou damned, inexecrable dog,
And for thy life let justice be accused;
Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
To hold opinion with Pythagoras
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infused itself in thee, for thy desires
Are wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.

SHYLOCK
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud.
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.

DUKE
This letter from Bellario doth commend
A young and learned doctor to our court.
Where is he?

NERISSA, [as Clerk]  He attendeth here hard by
To know your answer whether you'll admit him.

DUKE
With all my heart.--Some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
[Attendants exit.]
Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
[He reads.]
Your Grace shall understand that, at the receipt of
your letter, I am very sick, but in the instant that your
messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a
young doctor of Rome. His name is Balthazar. I
acquainted him with the cause in controversy between
the Jew and Antonio the merchant. We turned o'er
many books together. He is furnished with my opinion,
which, bettered with his own learning (the greatness
whereof I cannot enough commend), comes with
him at my importunity to fill up your Grace's request
in my stead. I beseech you let his lack of years be no
impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation, for I
never knew so young a body with so old a head. I
leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial
shall better publish his commendation.

You hear the learned Bellario what he writes.

[Enter Portia for Balthazar, disguised as a doctor of
laws, with Attendants.]

And here I take it is the doctor come.--
Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I did, my lord.

DUKE  You are welcome. Take your place.
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the court?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I am informed throughly of the cause.
Which is the merchant here? And which the Jew?

DUKE
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Is your name Shylock?

SHYLOCK  Shylock is my name.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
[To Antonio.] You stand within his danger, do you
not?

ANTONIO
Ay, so he says.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Do you confess the bond?

ANTONIO
I do.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Then must the Jew be merciful.

SHYLOCK
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
The quality of mercy is not strained.
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown.
His scepter shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
But mercy is above this sceptered sway.
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings;
It is an attribute to God Himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest God's
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this:
That in the course of justice none of us
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
Which, if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant
there.

SHYLOCK
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Is he not able to discharge the money?

BASSANIO
Yes. Here I tender it for him in the court,
Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart.
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. [To the Duke.] And I
beseech you,
Wrest once the law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It must not be. There is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established;
'Twill be recorded for a precedent
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.

SHYLOCK
A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel.
O wise young judge, how I do honor thee!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I pray you let me look upon the bond.

SHYLOCK
Here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.
[Handing Portia a paper.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Shylock, there's thrice thy money offered thee.

SHYLOCK
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven!
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No, not for Venice!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Why, this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the merchant's heart.--Be merciful;
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.

SHYLOCK
When it is paid according to the tenor.
It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
You know the law; your exposition
Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law,
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me. I stay here on my bond.

ANTONIO
Most heartily I do beseech the court
To give the judgment.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Why, then, thus it is:
You must prepare your bosom for his knife--

SHYLOCK
O noble judge! O excellent young man!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
For the intent and purpose of the law
Hath full relation to the penalty,
Which here appeareth due upon the bond.

SHYLOCK
'Tis very true. O wise and upright judge,
How much more elder art thou than thy looks!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar, to Antonio]
Therefore lay bare your bosom--

SHYLOCK  Ay, his breast!
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge?
"Nearest his heart." Those are the very words.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It is so.
Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?

SHYLOCK  I have them ready.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

SHYLOCK
Is it so nominated in the bond?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
It is not so expressed, but what of that?
'Twere good you do so much for charity.

SHYLOCK
I cannot find it. 'Tis not in the bond.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
You, merchant, have you anything to say?

ANTONIO
But little. I am armed and well prepared.--
Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well.
Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you,
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
Than is her custom: it is still her use
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty, from which ling'ring penance
Of such misery doth she cut me off.
Commend me to your honorable wife,
Tell her the process of Antonio's end,
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death,
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge
Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I'll pay it instantly with all my heart.

BASSANIO
Antonio, I am married to a wife
Which is as dear to me as life itself,
But life itself, my wife, and all the world
Are not with me esteemed above thy life.
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

PORTIA, [aside]
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.

GRATIANO
I have a wife who I protest I love.
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

NERISSA, [aside]
'Tis well you offer it behind her back.
The wish would make else an unquiet house.

SHYLOCK
These be the Christian husbands! I have a
daughter--
Would any of the stock of Barabbas
Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!
We trifle time. I pray thee, pursue sentence.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine:
The court awards it, and the law doth give it.

SHYLOCK  Most rightful judge!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast:
The law allows it, and the court awards it.

SHYLOCK
Most learned judge! A sentence!--Come, prepare.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Tarry a little. There is something else.
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
The words expressly are "a pound of flesh."
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the laws of Venice confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.

GRATIANO
O upright judge!--Mark, Jew.--O learned judge!

SHYLOCK
Is that the law?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Thyself shalt see the act.
For, as thou urgest justice, be assured
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir'st.

GRATIANO
O learned judge!--Mark, Jew, a learned judge!

SHYLOCK
I take this offer then. Pay the bond thrice
And let the Christian go.

BASSANIO  Here is the money.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Soft! The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste!
He shall have nothing but the penalty.

GRATIANO
O Jew, an upright judge, a learned judge!

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
But just a pound of flesh. If thou tak'st more
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple--nay, if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.

GRATIANO
A second Daniel! A Daniel, Jew!
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

SHYLOCK
Give me my principal and let me go.

BASSANIO
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
He hath refused it in the open court.
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

GRATIANO
A Daniel still, say I! A second Daniel!--
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

SHYLOCK
Shall I not have barely my principal?

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

SHYLOCK
Why, then, the devil give him good of it!
I'll stay no longer question.	[He begins to exit.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Tarry, Jew.
The law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an alien
That by direct or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any citizen,
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,
And the offender's life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou stand'st,
For it appears by manifest proceeding
That indirectly, and directly too,
Thou hast contrived against the very life
Of the defendant, and thou hast incurred
The danger formerly by me rehearsed.
Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

GRATIANO
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself!
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
Therefore thou must be hanged at the state's
charge.

DUKE
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.

SHYLOCK
Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that.
You take my house when you do take the prop
That doth sustain my house; you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?

GRATIANO
A halter gratis, nothing else, for God's sake!

ANTONIO
So please my lord the Duke and all the court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content, so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more: that for this favor
He presently become a Christian;
The other, that he do record a gift,
Here in the court, of all he dies possessed
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

DUKE
He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?

SHYLOCK
I am content.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  Clerk, draw a deed of gift.

SHYLOCK
I pray you give me leave to go from hence.
I am not well. Send the deed after me
And I will sign it.

DUKE  Get thee gone, but do it.

GRATIANO
In christ'ning shalt thou have two godfathers.
Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
[Shylock exits.]

DUKE, [to Portia as Balthazar]
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon.
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is meet I presently set forth.

DUKE
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.--
Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
For in my mind you are much bound to him.
[The Duke and his train exit.]

BASSANIO, [to Portia as Balthazar]
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof
Three thousand ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

ANTONIO
And stand indebted, over and above,
In love and service to you evermore.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I, delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account myself well paid.
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
I pray you know me when we meet again.
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
[She begins to exit.]

BASSANIO
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you:
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
Give me your gloves; I'll wear them for your sake--
And for your love I'll take this ring from you.
Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this.

BASSANIO
This ring, good sir? Alas, it is a trifle.
I will not shame myself to give you this.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I will have nothing else but only this.
And now methinks I have a mind to it.

BASSANIO
There's more depends on this than on the value.
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation.
Only for this, I pray you pardon me.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.

BASSANIO
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
And if your wife be not a madwoman,
And know how well I have deserved this ring,
She would not hold out enemy forever
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you.
[Portia and Nerissa exit.]

ANTONIO
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
Let his deservings and my love withal
Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandment.

BASSANIO
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him.
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou canst
Unto Antonio's house. Away, make haste.
[Gratiano exits.]
Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont.--Come, Antonio.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Portia and Nerissa, still in disguise.]


PORTIA
Inquire the Jew's house out; give him this deed
And let him sign it. [She gives Nerissa a paper.] We'll
away tonight,
And be a day before our husbands home.
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

[Enter Gratiano.]


GRATIANO
Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en.
My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
Your company at dinner.	[He gives her a ring.]

PORTIA, [as Balthazar]  That cannot be.
His ring I do accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house.

GRATIANO
That will I do.

NERISSA, [as Clerk]  Sir, I would speak with you.
[Aside to Portia.] I'll see if I can get my husband's
ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep forever.

PORTIA, [aside to Nerissa]
Thou mayst, I warrant! We shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we'll outface them, and outswear them, too.--
Away, make haste! Thou know'st where I will tarry.
[She exits.]

NERISSA, [as Clerk]
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Lorenzo and Jessica.]


LORENZO
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees
And they did make no noise, in such a night
Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressid lay that night.

JESSICA  In such a night
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself
And ran dismayed away.

LORENZO  In such a night
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
To come again to Carthage.

JESSICA  In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Aeson.

LORENZO  In such a night
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
As far as Belmont.

JESSICA  In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne'er a true one.

LORENZO  In such a night
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

JESSICA
I would out-night you did nobody come,
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

[Enter Stephano, a Messenger.]


LORENZO
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?

STEPHANO  A friend.

LORENZO
A friend? What friend? Your name, I pray you,
friend.

STEPHANO
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont. She doth stray about
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

LORENZO  Who comes with her?

STEPHANO
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
I pray you, is my master yet returned?

LORENZO
He is not, nor we have not heard from him.--
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
And ceremoniously let us prepare
Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

[Enter Lancelet, the Clown.]


LANCELET  Sola, sola! Wo ha, ho! Sola, sola!

LORENZO  Who calls?

LANCELET  Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master
Lorenzo, sola, sola!

LORENZO  Leave holloaing, man! Here.

LANCELET  Sola! Where, where?

LORENZO  Here!

LANCELET  Tell him there's a post come from my master
with his horn full of good news. My master will
be here ere morning, sweet soul.	[Lancelet exits.]

LORENZO, [to Jessica]
Let's in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter; why should we go in?--
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
Within the house, your mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.
[Stephano exits.]
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank.
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still choiring to the young-eyed cherubins.
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

[Enter Stephano and musicians.]

Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn.
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear,
And draw her home with music.
[Music plays.]

JESSICA
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.

LORENZO
The reason is, your spirits are attentive.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze
By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and
floods,
Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for the time doth change his nature.
The man that hath no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

[Enter Portia and Nerissa.]


PORTIA
That light we see is burning in my hall.
How far that little candle throws his beams!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

NERISSA
When the moon shone we did not see the candle.

PORTIA
So doth the greater glory dim the less.
A substitute shines brightly as a king
Until a king be by, and then his state
Empties itself as doth an inland brook
Into the main of waters. Music, hark!

NERISSA
It is your music, madam, of the house.

PORTIA
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

NERISSA
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.

PORTIA
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
When neither is attended, and I think
The nightingale, if she should sing by day
When every goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a musician than the wren.
How many things by season seasoned are
To their right praise and true perfection!
Peace--how the moon sleeps with Endymion
And would not be awaked!
[Music ceases.]

LORENZO  That is the voice,
Or I am much deceived, of Portia.

PORTIA
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
By the bad voice.

LORENZO  Dear lady, welcome home.

PORTIA
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
Which speed we hope the better for our words.
Are they returned?

LORENZO  Madam, they are not yet,
But there is come a messenger before
To signify their coming.

PORTIA  Go in, Nerissa.
Give order to my servants that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence--
Nor you, Lorenzo--Jessica, nor you.
[A trumpet sounds.]

LORENZO
Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet.
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

PORTIA
This night methinks is but the daylight sick;
It looks a little paler. 'Tis a day
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

[Enter Bassanio, Antonio, Gratiano, and their followers.]


BASSANIO
We should hold day with the Antipodes
If you would walk in absence of the sun.

PORTIA
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me.
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
[Gratiano and Nerissa talk aside.]

BASSANIO
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend.
This is the man, this is Antonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

PORTIA
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear he was much bound for you.

ANTONIO
No more than I am well acquitted of.

PORTIA
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
It must appear in other ways than words;
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

GRATIANO, [to Nerissa]
By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong!
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.

PORTIA
A quarrel ho, already! What's the matter?

GRATIANO
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
That she did give me, whose posy was
For all the world like cutler's poetry
Upon a knife, "Love me, and leave me not."

NERISSA
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it you
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave.
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it.

GRATIANO
He will, an if he live to be a man.

NERISSA
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.

GRATIANO
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk,
A prating boy that begged it as a fee.
I could not for my heart deny it him.

PORTIA
You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands.
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.
An 'twere to me I should be mad at it.

BASSANIO, [aside]
Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
And swear I lost the ring defending it.

GRATIANO
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that begged it, and indeed
Deserved it, too. And then the boy, his clerk,
That took some pains in writing, he begged mine,
And neither man nor master would take aught
But the two rings.

PORTIA  What ring gave you, my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you received of me.

BASSANIO
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it, but you see my finger
Hath not the ring upon it. It is gone.

PORTIA
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
Until I see the ring!

NERISSA, [to Gratiano]  Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine!

BASSANIO  Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
When naught would be accepted but the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

PORTIA
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
Or your own honor to contain the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
I'll die for 't but some woman had the ring!

BASSANIO
No, by my honor, madam, by my soul,
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me
And begged the ring, the which I did deny him
And suffered him to go displeased away,
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
I was enforced to send it after him.
I was beset with shame and courtesy.
My honor would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady,
For by these blessed candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begged
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

PORTIA
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house!
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you:
I'll not deny him anything I have,
No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argus.
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honor, which is yet mine own,
I'll have that doctor for my bedfellow.

NERISSA
And I his clerk. Therefore be well advised
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

GRATIANO
Well, do you so. Let not me take him, then,
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.

ANTONIO
I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.

PORTIA
Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome
notwithstanding.

BASSANIO
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
Wherein I see myself--

PORTIA  Mark you but that!
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
In each eye one. Swear by your double self,
And there's an oath of credit.

BASSANIO  Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

ANTONIO
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
Which but for him that had your husband's ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

PORTIA
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
[Giving Antonio a ring.]
And bid him keep it better than the other.

ANTONIO
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.

BASSANIO
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!

PORTIA
I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

NERISSA
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
[She shows a ring.]

GRATIANO
Why, this is like the mending of highways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough!
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?

PORTIA
Speak not so grossly.--You are all amazed.
[She hands a paper to Bassanio.]
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there, her clerk. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And even but now returned. I have not yet
Entered my house.--Antonio, you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon.
[Handing him a paper.]
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbor suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.

ANTONIO  I am dumb.

BASSANIO
Were you the doctor and I knew you not?

GRATIANO
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?

NERISSA
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.

BASSANIO, [to Portia]
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

ANTONIO
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road.

PORTIA  How now, Lorenzo?
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

NERISSA
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
[Handing him a paper.]
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possessed of.

LORENZO
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.

PORTIA  It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

GRATIANO
Let it be so. The first inter'gatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is
Whether till the next night she had rather stay
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.
[They exit.]

===============================================

Romeo and Juliet
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/romeo-and-juliet/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
ROMEO
MONTAGUE, his father
LADY MONTAGUE, his mother
BENVOLIO, their kinsman
ABRAM, a Montague servingman
BALTHASAR, Romeo's servingman
JULIET
CAPULET, her father
LADY CAPULET, her mother
NURSE to Juliet
TYBALT, kinsman to the Capulets
PETRUCHIO, Tybalt's companion
Capulet's Cousin
Servingmen:
  SAMPSON
  GREGORY
  PETER
Other Servingmen
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona
PARIS, the Prince's kinsman and Juliet's suitor
MERCUTIO, the Prince's kinsman and Romeo's friend
Paris' Page
FRIAR LAWRENCE
FRIAR JOHN
APOTHECARY
Three or four Citizens
Three Musicians
Three Watchmen
CHORUS
Attendants, Maskers, Torchbearers, a Boy with a drum, Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, Tybalt's Page, Servingmen.


THE PROLOGUE
============
[Enter Chorus.]


Two households, both alike in dignity
(In fair Verona, where we lay our scene),
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
[Chorus exits.]


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and bucklers,
of the house of Capulet.]


SAMPSON  Gregory, on my word we'll not carry coals.

GREGORY  No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON  I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY  Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of
collar.

SAMPSON  I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY  But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON  A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY  To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to
stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn'st
away.

SAMPSON  A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I
will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY  That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest
goes to the wall.

SAMPSON  'Tis true, and therefore women, being the
weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore
I will push Montague's men from the wall and
thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY  The quarrel is between our masters and us
their men.

SAMPSON  'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant.
When I have fought with the men, I will be civil
with the maids; I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY  The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON  Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY  They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON  Me they shall feel while I am able to stand,
and 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY  'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor-john. Draw thy tool. Here comes
of the house of Montagues.

[Enter Abram with another Servingman.]


SAMPSON  My naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back
thee.

GREGORY  How? Turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON  Fear me not.

GREGORY  No, marry. I fear thee!

SAMPSON  Let us take the law of our sides; let them
begin.

GREGORY  I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it
as they list.

SAMPSON  Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at
them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.
[He bites his thumb.]

ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON  I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON, [aside to Gregory]  Is the law of our side if I
say "Ay"?

GREGORY, [aside to Sampson]  No.

SAMPSON  No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir,
but I bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY  Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAM  Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMPSON  But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as
good a man as you.

ABRAM  No better.

SAMPSON  Well, sir.

[Enter Benvolio.]


GREGORY, [aside to Sampson]  Say "better"; here comes
one of my master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON  Yes, better, sir.

ABRAM  You lie.

SAMPSON  Draw if you be men.--Gregory, remember
thy washing blow.	[They fight.]

BENVOLIO  Part, fools!	[Drawing his sword.]
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

[Enter Tybalt, drawing his sword.]


TYBALT
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT
What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!	[They fight.]

[Enter three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans.]


CITIZENS
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

[Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.]


CAPULET
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a
sword?

[Enter old Montague and his Wife.]

CAPULET
My sword, I say. Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE
Thou villain Capulet!--Hold me not; let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

[Enter Prince Escalus with his train.]


PRINCE
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stained steel--
Will they not hear?--What ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
[All but Montague, Lady Montague,
and Benvolio exit.]

MONTAGUE, [to Benvolio]
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE
O, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO
Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was 'ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own
(Which then most sought where most might not be
found,
Being one too many by my weary self),
Pursued my humor, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO
Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE
Both by myself and many other friends.
But he, his own affections' counselor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true,
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beauty to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.

[Enter Romeo.]


BENVOLIO
See where he comes. So please you, step aside.
I'll know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift.--Come, madam, let's away.
[Montague and Lady Montague exit.]

BENVOLIO
Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO  Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO
But new struck nine.

ROMEO  Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO
Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO  In love?

ROMEO  Out--

BENVOLIO  Of love?

ROMEO
Out of her favor where I am in love.

BENVOLIO
Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?--O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O anything of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO  No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO  At thy good heart's oppression.

ROMEO  Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO  Soft, I will go along.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.
This is not Romeo. He's some other where.

BENVOLIO
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?

ROMEO  What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO
Groan? Why, no. But sadly tell me who.

ROMEO
A sick man in sadness makes his will--
A word ill urged to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO
A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO
Well in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
And, in strong proof of chastity well armed,
From love's weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty, starved with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.

ROMEO
O, teach me how I should forget to think!

BENVOLIO
By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO  'Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair;
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passed that passing fair?
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO
I'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Capulet, County Paris, and a Servingman.]


CAPULET
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS
Of honorable reckoning are you both,
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET
But saying o'er what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET
And too soon marred are those so early made.
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
She's the hopeful lady of my earth.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
My will to her consent is but a part.
And, she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest
Such as I love; and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-appareled April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Come go with me.	[To Servingman, giving him a list.]
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona, find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
[Capulet and Paris exit.]

SERVINGMAN  Find them out whose names are written
here! It is written that the shoemaker should
meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets.
But I am sent to find those persons whose names
are here writ, and can never find what names the
writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned.
In good time!

[Enter Benvolio and Romeo.]


BENVOLIO, [to Romeo]
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
One pain is lessened by another's anguish.
Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO  For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO  Why Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented, and--good e'en, good
fellow.

SERVINGMAN  God gi' good e'en. I pray, sir, can you
read?

ROMEO
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

SERVINGMAN  Perhaps you have learned it without
book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?

ROMEO
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

SERVINGMAN  You say honestly. Rest you merry.

ROMEO  Stay, fellow. I can read.	[(He reads the letter.)]
Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters,
The lady widow of Vitruvio,
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine,
Mine Uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters,
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia,
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt,
Lucio and the lively Helena.
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?

SERVINGMAN  Up.

ROMEO  Whither? To supper?

SERVINGMAN  To our house.

ROMEO  Whose house?

SERVINGMAN  My master's.

ROMEO
Indeed I should have asked thee that before.

SERVINGMAN  Now I'll tell you without asking. My
master is the great rich Capulet, and, if you be not
of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest you merry.	[He exits.]

BENVOLIO
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye;
But in that crystal scales let there be weighed
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

ROMEO
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
I bade her come.--What, lamb! What, ladybird!
God forbid. Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

[Enter Juliet.]


JULIET  How now, who calls?

NURSE  Your mother.

JULIET
Madam, I am here. What is your will?

LADY CAPULET
This is the matter.--Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret.--Nurse, come back again.
I have remembered me, thou 's hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.

NURSE
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET  She's not fourteen.

NURSE  I'll lay fourteen of my teeth (and yet, to my teen
be it spoken, I have but four) she's not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lammastide?

LADY CAPULET  A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she. Marry, I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,
And she was weaned (I never shall forget it)
Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug.
"Shake," quoth the dovehouse. 'Twas no need, I
trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years.
For then she could stand high-lone. Nay, by th'
rood,
She could have run and waddled all about,
For even the day before, she broke her brow,
And then my husband (God be with his soul,
He was a merry man) took up the child.
"Yea," quoth he, "Dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" And, by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying and said "Ay."
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. "Wilt thou not, Jule?"
quoth he.
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said "Ay."

LADY CAPULET
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.

NURSE
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say "Ay."
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone,
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
"Yea," quoth my husband. "Fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" It stinted and said "Ay."

JULIET
And stint thou, too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

NURSE
Peace. I have done. God mark thee to his grace,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET
Marry, that "marry" is the very theme
I came to talk of.--Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET
It is an honor that I dream not of.

NURSE
An honor? Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy
teat.

LADY CAPULET
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE
A man, young lady--lady, such a man
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE
Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen.
Examine every married lineament
And see how one another lends content,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.
So shall you share all that he doth possess
By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris' love?

JULIET
I'll look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

[Enter Servingman.]


SERVINGMAN  Madam, the guests are come, supper
served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the
Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in
extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you,
follow straight.

LADY CAPULET
We follow thee.	[Servingman exits.]
Juliet, the County stays.

NURSE
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other
Maskers, Torchbearers, and a Boy with a drum.]


ROMEO
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?

BENVOLIO
The date is out of such prolixity.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But let them measure us by what they will.
We'll measure them a measure and be gone.

ROMEO
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO
And to sink in it should you burden love--
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.--
Give me a case to put my visage in.--
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase:
I'll be a candle holder and look on;
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word.
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire--
Or, save your reverence, love--wherein thou
stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO
Nay, that's not so.

MERCUTIO  I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights; in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO
And we mean well in going to this masque,
But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO  Why, may one ask?

ROMEO
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO  And so did I.

ROMEO
Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO  That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO
O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men's noses as they lie asleep.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine's wat'ry beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
On courtiers' knees, that dream on cur'sies straight;
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
Tickling a parson's nose as he lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another benefice.
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she--

ROMEO  Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace.
Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO  True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO
I fear too early, for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels, and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO  Strike, drum.
[They march about the stage
and then withdraw to the side.]

Scene 5
=======
[Servingmen come forth with napkins.]


FIRST SERVINGMAN  Where's Potpan that he helps not
to take away? He shift a trencher? He scrape a
trencher?

SECOND SERVINGMAN  When good manners shall lie
all in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed
too, 'tis a foul thing.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Away with the joint stools, remove
the court cupboard, look to the plate.--
Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone
and Nell.--Anthony and Potpan!

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Ay, boy, ready.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  You are looked for and called for,
asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  We cannot be here and there too.
Cheerly, boys! Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver
take all.	[They move aside.]

[Enter Capulet and his household, all the guests and
gentlewomen to Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, and the
other Maskers.]


CAPULET
Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with
you.--
Ah, my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns. Am I come near you
now?--
Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone.
You are welcome, gentlemen.--Come, musicians,
play.	[Music plays and they dance.]
A hall, a hall, give room!--And foot it, girls.--
More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.--
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.--
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is 't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULET'S COUSIN  By 'r Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET
What, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.

CAPULET'S COUSIN
'Tis more, 'tis more. His son is elder, sir.
His son is thirty.

CAPULET  Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO, [to a Servingman]
What lady's that which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?

SERVINGMAN  I know not, sir.

ROMEO
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear--
Beauty too rich for use, for Earth too dear.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.--
Fetch me my rapier, boy.	[Page exits.]
What, dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antic face
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET
Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT  'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.
He bears him like a portly gentleman,
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT
It fits when such a villain is a guest.
I'll not endure him.

CAPULET  He shall be endured.
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to.
Am I the master here or you? Go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests,
You will set cock-a-hoop, you'll be the man!

TYBALT
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET  Go to, go to.
You are a saucy boy. Is 't so indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
You must contrary me. Marry, 'tis time--
Well said, my hearts.--You are a princox, go.
Be quiet, or--More light, more light!--for shame,
I'll make you quiet.--What, cheerly, my hearts!

TYBALT
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
[He exits.]

ROMEO, [taking Juliet's hand]
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

ROMEO
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO
O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.
They pray: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

ROMEO
Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
[He kisses her.]
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.

JULIET
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.	[He kisses her.]

JULIET  You kiss by th' book.

NURSE
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
[Juliet moves toward her mother.]

ROMEO
What is her mother?

NURSE  Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.	[Nurse moves away.]

ROMEO, [aside]  Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foe's debt.

BENVOLIO
Away, begone. The sport is at the best.

ROMEO
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.

CAPULET
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.--
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.--
More torches here.--Come on then, let's to bed.--
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.
I'll to my rest.
[All but Juliet and the Nurse begin to exit.]

JULIET
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

NURSE
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET
What's he that now is going out of door?

NURSE
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.

JULIET
What's he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE  I know not.

JULIET
Go ask his name. [The Nurse goes.] If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

NURSE, [returning]
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathed enemy.

NURSE
What's this? What's this?

JULIET  A rhyme I learned even now
Of one I danced withal.
[One calls within "Juliet."]

NURSE  Anon, anon.
Come, let's away. The strangers all are gone.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====



[Enter Chorus.]


Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir.
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
[Chorus exits.]

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Romeo alone.]


ROMEO
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
[He withdraws.]

[Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.]

BENVOLIO
Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!

MERCUTIO  He is wise
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO  Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied.
Cry but "Ay me," pronounce but "love" and
"dove."
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.--
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.--
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead, and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO
This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress' name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.--
O Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open-arse, thou a pop'rin pear.
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.--
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO  Go, then, for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Romeo comes forward.]



ROMEO
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

[Enter Juliet above.]

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is my lady. O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold. 'Tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those
stars
As daylight doth a lamp; her eye in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET  Ay me.

ROMEO, [aside]  She speaks.
O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO, [aside]
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And, for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

ROMEO  I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO  By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO
With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO
I have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And, but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form; fain, fain deny
What I have spoke. But farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say "Ay,"
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or, if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my havior light.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more coying to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st ere I was ware
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET
O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO
What shall I swear by?

JULIET  Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO  If my heart's dear love--

JULIET
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight.
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say "It lightens." Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO
Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
[Nurse calls from within.]
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.--
Anon, good nurse.--Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little; I will come again.	[She exits.]

ROMEO
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

[Reenter Juliet above.]


JULIET
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

NURSE, [within]  Madam.

JULIET
I come anon.--But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee--

NURSE, [within]  Madam.

JULIET  By and by, I come.--
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO  So thrive my soul--

JULIET  A thousand times good night.	[She exits.]

ROMEO
A thousand times the worse to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their
books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
[Going.]

[Enter Juliet above again.]


JULIET
Hist, Romeo, hist! O, for a falc'ner's voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of "My Romeo!"

ROMEO
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.

JULIET
Romeo.

ROMEO  My dear.

JULIET  What o'clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO  By the hour of nine.

JULIET
I will not fail. 'Tis twenty year till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.

ROMEO
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET
'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET  Sweet, so would I.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet
sorrow
That I shall say "Good night" till it be morrow.
[She exits.]

ROMEO
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly friar's close cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence alone with a basket.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Check'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The Earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the Earth doth live
But to the Earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.

[Enter Romeo.]

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each
part;
Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs--grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Benedicite.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid "Good morrow" to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And, where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth
reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uproused with some distemp'rature,
Or, if not so, then here I hit it right:
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
That's my good son. But where hast thou been
then?

ROMEO
I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow
I'll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ringing in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence
then:
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO
And bad'st me bury love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO
I pray thee, chide me not. Her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I'll thy assistant be,
For this alliance may so happy prove
To turn your households' rancor to pure love.

ROMEO
O, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.]


MERCUTIO
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO
Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that
Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO  A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO  Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO  Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO  Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how
he dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO  Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead,
stabbed with a white wench's black eye, run
through the ear with a love-song, the very pin of his
heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt shaft. And
is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO  Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO  More than prince of cats. O, he's the courageous
captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.
He rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in
your bosom--the very butcher of a silk button, a
duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house
of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal
passado, the punto reverso, the hay!

BENVOLIO  The what?

MERCUTIO  The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
phantasimes, these new tuners of accent: "By
Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good
whore!" Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire,
that we should be thus afflicted with these
strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these "pardon-me" 's,
who stand so much on the new form
that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O their
bones, their bones!

[Enter Romeo.]


BENVOLIO  Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO  Without his roe, like a dried herring. O
flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the
numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his lady
was a kitchen wench (marry, she had a better love
to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a gray
eye or so, but not to the purpose.--Signior Romeo,
bonjour. There's a French salutation to your French
slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.

ROMEO  Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit
did I give you?

MERCUTIO  The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?

ROMEO  Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was
great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain
courtesy.

MERCUTIO  That's as much as to say such a case as
yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO  Meaning, to curtsy.

MERCUTIO  Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO  A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO  Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO  "Pink" for flower.

MERCUTIO  Right.

ROMEO  Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO  Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou
hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole
of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing,
solely singular.

ROMEO  O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.

MERCUTIO  Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits
faints.

ROMEO  Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I'll cry
a match.

MERCUTIO  Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I
am done, for thou hast more of the wild goose in
one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole
five. Was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO  Thou wast never with me for anything when
thou wast not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO  I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO  Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO  Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.

ROMEO  And is it not, then, well served into a sweet
goose?

MERCUTIO  O, here's a wit of cheveril that stretches
from an inch narrow to an ell broad.

ROMEO  I stretch it out for that word "broad," which
added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a
broad goose.

MERCUTIO  Why, is not this better now than groaning
for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou
Romeo, now art thou what thou art, by art as well as
by nature. For this driveling love is like a great
natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his
bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO  Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO  Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against
the hair.

BENVOLIO  Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO  O, thou art deceived. I would have made it
short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale
and meant indeed to occupy the argument no
longer.

[Enter Nurse and her man Peter.]


ROMEO  Here's goodly gear. A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO  Two, two--a shirt and a smock.

NURSE  Peter.

PETER  Anon.

NURSE  My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO  Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan's
the fairer face.

NURSE  God you good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO  God you good e'en, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE  Is it good e'en?

MERCUTIO  'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of
the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

NURSE  Out upon you! What a man are you?

ROMEO  One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself
to mar.

NURSE  By my troth, it is well said: "for himself to
mar," quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me
where I may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO  I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older
when you have found him than he was when you
sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for
fault of a worse.

NURSE  You say well.

MERCUTIO  Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i'
faith, wisely, wisely.

NURSE  If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.

BENVOLIO  She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO  A bawd, a bawd, a bawd. So ho!

ROMEO  What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO  No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten
pie that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[Singing.]	An old hare hoar,
	And an old hare hoar,
	   Is very good meat in Lent.
	But a hare that is hoar
	Is too much for a score
	   When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to
dinner thither.

ROMEO  I will follow you.

MERCUTIO  Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady,
lady.	[Mercutio and Benvolio exit.]

NURSE  I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this
that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO  A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself
talk and will speak more in a minute than he will
stand to in a month.

NURSE  An he speak anything against me, I'll take him
down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty
such jacks. An if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave, I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none
of his skains-mates. [To Peter.] And thou must stand
by too and suffer every knave to use me at his
pleasure.

PETER  I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had,
my weapon should quickly have been out. I warrant
you, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I
see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my
side.

NURSE  Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part
about me quivers. Scurvy knave! [To Romeo.] Pray
you, sir, a word. And, as I told you, my young lady
bid me inquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
keep to myself. But first let me tell you, if you
should lead her in a fool's paradise, as they say, it
were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. For
the gentlewoman is young; and therefore, if you
should deal double with her, truly it were an ill
thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very
weak dealing.

ROMEO  Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress.
I protest unto thee--

NURSE  Good heart, and i' faith I will tell her as much.
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO  What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not
mark me.

NURSE  I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO  Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
[Offering her money.]

NURSE  No, truly, sir, not a penny.

ROMEO  Go to, I say you shall.

NURSE
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.

NURSE
Now, God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO  What sayst thou, my dear nurse?

NURSE
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say
"Two may keep counsel, putting one away"?

ROMEO
Warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

NURSE  Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord,
Lord, when 'twas a little prating thing--O, there is
a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay
knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes
and tell her that Paris is the properer man, but I'll
warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any
clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and
Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO  Ay, nurse, what of that? Both with an R.

NURSE  Ah, mocker, that's the dog's name. R is for
the--No, I know it begins with some other letter,
and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you
and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

ROMEO  Commend me to thy lady.

NURSE  Ay, a thousand times.--Peter.

PETER  Anon.

NURSE  Before and apace.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Juliet.]


JULIET
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.

[Enter Nurse and Peter.]

O God, she comes!--O, honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

NURSE  Peter, stay at the gate.	[Peter exits.]

JULIET
Now, good sweet nurse--O Lord, why lookest thou
sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE
I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!

JULIET
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good nurse,
speak.

NURSE
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied; is 't good or bad?

NURSE  Well, you have made a simple choice. You know
not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he.
Though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg
excels all men's, and for a hand and a foot and a
body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy,
but I'll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at
home?

JULIET
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side! Ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jaunting up and down.

JULIET
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my
love?

NURSE  Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous--Where is your mother?

JULIET
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest:
"Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?"

NURSE  O God's lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET
Here's such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?

NURSE
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET  I have.

NURSE
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence' cell.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks;
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I'll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.

JULIET
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.

ROMEO
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

[Enter Juliet.]

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.

JULIET
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and their men.]


BENVOLIO
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
The day is hot, the Capels are abroad,
And if we meet we shall not 'scape a brawl,
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO  Thou art like one of these fellows that, when
he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his
sword upon the table and says "God send me no
need of thee" and, by the operation of the second
cup, draws him on the drawer when indeed there is
no need.

BENVOLIO  Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO  Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy
mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be
moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO  And what to?

MERCUTIO  Nay, an there were two such, we should
have none shortly, for one would kill the other.
Thou--why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that
hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than
thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking
nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy
out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been
beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou hast
quarreled with a man for coughing in the street
because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain
asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor
for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With
another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon?
And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling?

BENVOLIO  An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any
man should buy the fee simple of my life for an
hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO  The fee simple? O simple!

[Enter Tybalt, Petruchio, and others.]


BENVOLIO  By my head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO  By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT, [to his companions]
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.--
Gentlemen, good e'en. A word with one of you.

MERCUTIO  And but one word with one of us? Couple it
with something. Make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT  You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an
you will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO  Could you not take some occasion without
giving?

TYBALT  Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

MERCUTIO  Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels?
An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear
nothing but discords. Here's my fiddlestick; here's
that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

[Enter Romeo.]


TYBALT
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.

MERCUTIO
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower.
Your Worship in that sense may call him "man."

TYBALT
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.

ROMEO
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.

TYBALT
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO
I do protest I never injured thee
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so, good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

MERCUTIO
O calm, dishonorable, vile submission!
Alla stoccato carries it away.	[He draws.]
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?

TYBALT  What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO  Good king of cats, nothing but one of your
nine lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and, as
you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher
by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.

TYBALT  I am for you.	[He draws.]

ROMEO
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO  Come, sir, your passado.	[They fight.]

ROMEO
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
[Romeo draws.]
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage!
Tybalt! Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
[Romeo attempts to beat down their rapiers.
Tybalt stabs Mercutio.]

PETRUCHIO  Away, Tybalt!
[Tybalt, Petruchio, and their followers exit.]

MERCUTIO  I am hurt.
A plague o' both houses! I am sped.
Is he gone and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO  What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page?--Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
[Page exits.]

ROMEO
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO  No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as
a church door, but 'tis enough. 'Twill serve. Ask for
me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a
villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the
devil came you between us? I was hurt under your
arm.

ROMEO  I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me.
I have it, and soundly, too. Your houses!
[All but Romeo exit.]

ROMEO
This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf. My reputation stained
With Tybalt's slander--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper softened valor's steel.

[Enter Benvolio.]


BENVOLIO
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead.
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO
This day's black fate on more days doth depend.
This but begins the woe others must end.

[Enter Tybalt.]


BENVOLIO
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO
Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.--
Now, Tybalt, take the "villain" back again
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT
Thou wretched boy that didst consort him here
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO  This shall determine that.
[They fight. Tybalt falls.]

BENVOLIO
Romeo, away, begone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away.

ROMEO
O, I am Fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO  Why dost thou stay?
[Romeo exits.]

[Enter Citizens.]


CITIZEN
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO
There lies that Tybalt.

CITIZEN, [to Tybalt]  Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince's name, obey.

[Enter Prince, old Montague, Capulet, their Wives and all.]


PRINCE
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET
Tybalt, my cousin, O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay--
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud
"Hold, friends! Friends, part!" and swifter than his
tongue
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.

PRINCE
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE
Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE  And for that offense
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hearts' proceeding:
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
[They exit, the Capulet men
bearing off Tybalt's body.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Juliet alone.]


JULIET
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging. Such a wagoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaways' eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties, or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle till strange love grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in
night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Come, gentle night; come, loving black-browed
night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love
But not possessed it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them.

[Enter Nurse with cords.]

O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.--
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The
cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE  Ay, ay, the cords.
[Dropping the rope ladder.]

JULIET
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?

NURSE
Ah weraday, he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he's gone, he's killed, he's dead.

JULIET
Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE  Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo,
Whoever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but "Ay,"
And that bare vowel "I" shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an "I,"
Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer "Ay."
If he be slain, say "Ay," or if not, "No."
Brief sounds determine my weal or woe.

NURSE
I saw the wound. I saw it with mine eyes
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast--
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood. I swooned at the sight.

JULIET
O break, my heart, poor bankrout, break at once!
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.

NURSE
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtered and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,
For who is living if those two are gone?

NURSE
Tybalt is gone and Romeo banished.
Romeo that killed him--he is banished.

JULIET
O God, did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

NURSE
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.

JULIET
O serpent heart hid with a flow'ring face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honorable villain.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

NURSE  There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me
old.
Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET  Blistered be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,
For 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal Earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?

JULIET
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy
name
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killed my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my
husband.
All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murdered me. I would forget it fain,
But, O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
"Tybalt is dead and Romeo banished."
That "banished," that one word "banished,"
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be ranked with other griefs,
Why followed not, when she said "Tybalt's dead,"
"Thy father" or "thy mother," nay, or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved?
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
"Romeo is banished." To speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. "Romeo is banished."
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death. No words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?

NURSE
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be
spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.--
Take up those cords.
[The Nurse picks up the rope ladder.]
Poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords--come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

NURSE
Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark you, your Romeo will be here at night.
I'll to him. He is hid at Lawrence' cell.

JULIET
O, find him!	[Giving the Nurse a ring.]
Give this ring to my true knight
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enamored of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.

[Enter Romeo.]


ROMEO
Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.

ROMEO
What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

ROMEO
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say "death,"
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say "banishment."

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Here from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO
There is no world without Verona walls
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence "banished" is "banished from the world,"
And world's exile is death. Then "banished"
Is death mistermed. Calling death "banished,"
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden ax
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law
And turned that black word "death" to
"banishment."
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO
'Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.
They are free men, but I am banished.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground
knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But "banished" to kill me? "Banished"?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin absolver, and my friend professed,
To mangle me with that word "banished"?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.

ROMEO
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I'll give thee armor to keep off that word,
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO
Yet "banished"? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO
How should they when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy
hair
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
[Romeo throws himself down.]
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
[Knock within.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mistlike, enfold me from the search of eyes.
[Knock.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hark, how they knock!--Who's there?--Romeo,
arise.
Thou wilt be taken.--Stay awhile.--Stand up.
[Knock.]
Run to my study.--By and by.--God's will,
What simpleness is this?--I come, I come.
[Knock.]
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's
your will?

NURSE, [within]
Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [admitting the Nurse]
Welcome, then.

[Enter Nurse.]


NURSE
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where's my lady's lord? Where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
There on the ground, with his own tears made
drunk.

NURSE
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case. O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring.--
Stand up, stand up. Stand an you be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO  Nurse.

NURSE
Ah sir, ah sir, death's the end of all.

ROMEO, [rising up]
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My concealed lady to our canceled love?

NURSE
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And "Tybalt" calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO  As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman.--O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.	[He draws his dagger.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Hold thy desperate hand!
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better tempered.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth,
Since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valor of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defense.
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead:
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tybalt: there art thou happy.
The law that threatened death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile: there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pouts upon thy fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.
Ascend her chamber. Hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.--
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE
O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!--
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
[Nurse gives Romeo a ring.]
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
[She exits.]

ROMEO
How well my comfort is revived by this!

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Go hence, good night--and here stands all your
state:
Either be gone before the watch be set
Or by the break of day disguised from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell. Good night.

ROMEO
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.]


CAPULET
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late. She'll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS
These times of woe afford no times to woo.--
Madam, good night. Commend me to your
daughter.

LADY CAPULET
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.
Tonight she's mewed up to her heaviness.

CAPULET
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love. I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.--
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love,
And bid her--mark you me?--on Wednesday
next--
But soft, what day is this?

PARIS  Monday, my lord.

CAPULET
Monday, ha ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
O' Thursday let it be.--O' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.--
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado: a friend or two.
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET
Well, get you gone. O' Thursday be it, then.
[To Lady Capulet.] Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.--
Farewell, my lord.--Light to my chamber, ho!--
Afore me, it is so very late that we
May call it early by and by.--Good night.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft.]


JULIET
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain-tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhaled
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet. Thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO
Let me be ta'en; let me be put to death.
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon gray is not the morning's eye;
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come death and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is 't, my soul? Let's talk. It is not day.

JULIET
It is, it is. Hie hence, begone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad changed eyes.
O, now I would they had changed voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.
O, now begone. More light and light it grows.

ROMEO
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

[Enter Nurse.]


NURSE  Madam.

JULIET  Nurse?

NURSE
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke; be wary; look about.	[She exits.]

JULIET
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO
Farewell, farewell. One kiss and I'll descend.
[They kiss, and Romeo descends.]

JULIET
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

ROMEO  Farewell.
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET
O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our times to come.

JULIET
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails or thou lookest pale.

ROMEO
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.	[He exits.]

JULIET
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET  Ho, daughter, are you up?

JULIET
Who is 't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Is she not down so late or up so early?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
[Juliet descends.]

LADY CAPULET
Why, how now, Juliet?

JULIET  Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of
love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET  Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.

JULIET
What villain, madam?

LADY CAPULET  That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET, [aside]
Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
God pardon him. I do with all my heart,
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

LADY CAPULET
That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart, so for a kinsman vexed.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named and cannot come to him
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him.

LADY CAPULET
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, beseech your Ladyship?

LADY CAPULET
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.

JULIET
Madam, in happy time! What day is that?

LADY CAPULET
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET
Now, by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet, and when I do I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

[Enter Capulet and Nurse.]


CAPULET
When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore show'ring? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thy sighs,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body.--How now, wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?

JULIET
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic? What is this?
"Proud," and "I thank you," and "I thank you not,"
And yet "not proud"? Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow face!

LADY CAPULET  Fie, fie, what, are you mad?

JULIET, [kneeling]
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET
Hang thee, young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not; reply not; do not answer me.
My fingers itch.--Wife, we scarce thought us
blessed
That God had lent us but this only child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE  God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue.
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.

NURSE
I speak no treason.

CAPULET  O, God 'i' g' eden!

NURSE
May not one speak?

CAPULET  Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET  You are too hot.

CAPULET  God's bread, it makes me mad.
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matched. And having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly ligned,
Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,
Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man--
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer "I'll not wed. I cannot love.
I am too young. I pray you, pardon me."
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you!
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to 't; think on 't. I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart; advise.
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to 't; bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
[He exits.]

JULIET
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That sees into the bottom of my grief?--
O sweet my mother, cast me not away.
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
[She exits.]

JULIET, [rising]
O God! O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on Earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to Earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving Earth? Comfort me; counsel me.--
Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.--
What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.

NURSE  Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you,
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first, or, if it did not,
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET
Speak'st thou from thy heart?

NURSE
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.

JULIET  Amen.

NURSE  What?

JULIET
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.
Go in and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Lawrence' cell
To make confession and to be absolved.

NURSE
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.	[She exits.]

JULIET
Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counselor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
[She exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Friar Lawrence and County Paris.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS
My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
You say you do not know the lady's mind?
Uneven is the course. I like it not.

PARIS
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [aside]
I would I knew not why it should be slowed.--
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

[Enter Juliet.]


PARIS
Happily met, my lady and my wife.

JULIET
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS
That "may be" must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  That's a certain text.

PARIS
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS
So will you, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET
If I do so, it will be of more price
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.

PARIS
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET
The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS
Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.

JULIET
It may be so, for it is not mine own.--
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.--
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS
God shield I should disturb devotion!--
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse you.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.	[He exits.]

JULIET
O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O Juliet, I already know thy grief.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
[She shows him her knife.]
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore out of thy long-experienced time
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, daughter, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop'st with death himself to 'scape from it;
And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a charnel house,
O'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud
(Things that to hear them told have made me
tremble),
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Hold, then. Go home; be merry; give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
[Holding out a vial.]
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humor; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valor in the acting it.

JULIET
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [giving Juliet the vial]
Hold, get you gone. Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET
Love give me strength, and strength shall help
afford.
Farewell, dear father.
[They exit in different directions.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
two or three.]


CAPULET
So many guests invite as here are writ.
[One or two of the Servingmen exit
with Capulet's list.]
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

SERVINGMAN  You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if
they can lick their fingers.

CAPULET  How canst thou try them so?

SERVINGMAN  Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick
his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET  Go, begone.	[Servingman exits.]
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.--
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE  Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.

[Enter Juliet.]


NURSE
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET
How now, my headstrong, where have you been
gadding?

JULIET
Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here	[Kneeling.]
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET
Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET
Why, I am glad on 't. This is well. Stand up.
[Juliet rises.]
This is as 't should be.--Let me see the County.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.--
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET
Go, nurse. Go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
[Juliet and the Nurse exit.]

LADY CAPULET
We shall be short in our provision.
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET  Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.
I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.
I'll play the housewife for this once.--What ho!--
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Juliet and Nurse.]


JULIET
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET  Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
[Lady Capulet and the Nurse exit.]

JULIET
Farewell.--God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.--
Nurse!--What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.	[She takes out the vial.]
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
[She takes out her knife
and puts it down beside her.]
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desp'rate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point! Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to
thee.	[She drinks and falls upon her bed
within the curtains.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.]


LADY CAPULET
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

NURSE
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

[Enter old Capulet.]


CAPULET
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.--
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for cost.

NURSE  Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed. Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET
No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
[Lady Capulet and Nurse exit.]

CAPULET
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

[Enter three or four Servingmen with spits and logs
and baskets.]

Now fellow,
What is there?

FIRST SERVINGMAN
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.

CAPULET
Make haste, make haste.	[First Servingman exits.]
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVINGMAN
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET
Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
[Second Servingman exits.]
Good faith, 'tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
[Play music.]
For so he said he would. I hear him near.--
Nurse!--Wife! What ho!--What, nurse, I say!

[Enter Nurse.]

Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste, I say.
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======

NURSE, [approaching the bed]
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!--Fast, I warrant
her, she--
Why, lamb, why, lady! Fie, you slugabed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!--
What, not a word?--You take your pennyworths
now.
Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little.--God forgive me,
Marry, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.--Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He'll fright you up, i' faith.--Will it not be?
[She opens the bed's curtains.]
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down
again?
I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!--
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead.--
O, weraday, that ever I was born!--
Some aqua vitae, ho!--My lord! My lady!

[Enter Lady Capulet.]


LADY CAPULET
What noise is here?

NURSE  O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET
What is the matter?

NURSE  Look, look!--O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET
O me! O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

[Enter Capulet.]


CAPULET
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.

NURSE
She's dead, deceased. She's dead, alack the day!

LADY CAPULET
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead.

CAPULET
Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she's cold.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET  O woeful time!

CAPULET
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and the County Paris, with
Musicians.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET
Ready to go, but never to return.--
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law; Death is my heir.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!

NURSE
O woe, O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this!
O woeful day, O woeful day!

PARIS
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced;
And weep you now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array, bear her to church,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
[All but the Nurse and the Musicians exit.]

FIRST MUSICIAN
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
[Nurse exits.]

[Enter Peter.]


PETER  Musicians, O musicians, "Heart's ease,"
"Heart's ease." O, an you will have me live, play
"Heart's ease."

FIRST MUSICIAN  Why "Heart's ease?"

PETER  O musicians, because my heart itself plays "My
heart is full." O, play me some merry dump to
comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Not a dump, we. 'Tis no time to play
now.

PETER  You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN  No.

PETER  I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN  What will you give us?

PETER  No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give
you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN  Then will I give you the
serving-creature.

PETER  Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crochets. I'll re you, I'll fa
you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN  An you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN  Pray you, put up your dagger and
put out your wit.

PETER  Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat
you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger.
Answer me like men.
[Sings.]	When griping griefs the heart doth wound
	And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
	Then music with her silver sound--
Why "silver sound"? Why "music with her silver
sound"? What say you, Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN  Marry, sir, because silver hath a
sweet sound.

PETER  Prates.--What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN  I say "silver sound" because musicians
sound for silver.

PETER  Prates too.--What say you, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN  Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER  O, I cry you mercy. You are the singer. I will say
for you. It is "music with her silver sound" because
musicians have no gold for sounding:
[Sings.]	Then music with her silver sound
	With speedy help doth lend redress.
[He exits.]

FIRST MUSICIAN  What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN  Hang him, Jack. Come, we'll in
here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Romeo.]


ROMEO
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to
think!)
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!

[Enter Romeo's man Balthasar, in riding boots.]

News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How doth my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR
Then she is well and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels' monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
And presently took post to tell it you.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO
Is it e'en so?--Then I deny you, stars!--
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO  Tush, thou art deceived.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?

BALTHASAR
No, my good lord.

ROMEO  No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
[Balthasar exits.]
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary
(And hereabouts he dwells) which late I noted
In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples. Meager were his looks.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scattered to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
"An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him."
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.--
What ho, Apothecary!

[Enter Apothecary.]


APOTHECARY  Who calls so loud?

ROMEO
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
[He offers money.]
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

APOTHECARY
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law.
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

APOTHECARY
My poverty, but not my will, consents.

ROMEO
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.

APOTHECARY, [giving him the poison]
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO, [handing him the money]
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not
sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
[Apothecary exits.]
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Friar John.]


FRIAR JOHN
Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!

[Enter Friar Lawrence.]


FRIAR LAWRENCE
This same should be the voice of Friar John.--
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN
I could not send it--here it is again--
[Returning the letter.]
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.	[He exits.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents.
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Paris and his Page.]


PARIS
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground.
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee. Go.

PAGE, [aside]
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
[He moves away from Paris.]

PARIS, [scattering flowers]
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
(O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones!)
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
[Page whistles.]
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
[He steps aside.]

[Enter Romeo and Balthasar.]


ROMEO
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, begone.
But, if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I farther shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
[Giving money.]
Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR, [aside]
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
[He steps aside.]

ROMEO, [beginning to force open the tomb]
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.

PARIS
This is that banished haughty Montague
That murdered my love's cousin, with which grief
It is supposed the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
[Stepping forward.]
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O, begone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
For I come hither armed against myself.
Stay not, begone, live, and hereafter say
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.

PARIS
I do defy thy commination
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
[They draw and fight.]

PAGE
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
[He exits.]

PARIS
O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb; lay me with Juliet.	[He dies.]

ROMEO
In faith, I will.--Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so?--O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.--
[He opens the tomb.]
A grave? O, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.--
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
[Laying Paris in the tomb.]
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry, which their keepers call
A light'ning before death! O, how may I
Call this a light'ning?--O my love, my wife,
Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquered. Beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.--
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favor can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin.--Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh! Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O, you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
[Kissing Juliet.]
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavory guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Here's to my love. [Drinking.] O true apothecary,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
[He dies.]

[Enter Friar Lawrence with lantern, crow, and spade.]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves!--Who's there?

BALTHASAR
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.

BALTHASAR
It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE  Who is it?

BALTHASAR  Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR  Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR  I dare not, sir.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Stay, then. I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.

BALTHASAR
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, [moving toward the tomb]
Romeo!--
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulcher?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolored by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.

JULIET
O comfortable friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I hear some noise.--Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,
And Paris, too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

JULIET
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
[He exits.]
What's here? A cup closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.--
O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after! I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.	[She kisses him.]
Thy lips are warm!

[Enter Paris's Page and Watch.]


FIRST WATCH  Lead, boy. Which way?

JULIET
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O, happy dagger,
This is thy sheath. There rust, and let me die.
[She takes Romeo's dagger, stabs herself, and dies.]

PAGE
This is the place, there where the torch doth burn.

FIRST WATCH
The ground is bloody.--Search about the
churchyard.
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find, attach.
[Some watchmen exit.]
Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.--
Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
[Others exit.]
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

[Enter Watchmen with Romeo's man Balthasar.]


SECOND WATCH
Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the
churchyard.

FIRST WATCH
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

[Enter Friar Lawrence and another Watchman.]


THIRD WATCH
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard's side.

FIRST WATCH
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.

[Enter the Prince with Attendants.]


PRINCE
What misadventure is so early up
That calls our person from our morning rest?

[Enter Capulet and Lady Capulet.]


CAPULET
What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?

LADY CAPULET
O, the people in the street cry "Romeo,"
Some "Juliet," and some "Paris," and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

FIRST WATCH
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killed.

PRINCE
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder
comes.

FIRST WATCH
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo's man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom.

LADY CAPULET
O me, this sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulcher.

[Enter Montague.]


PRINCE
Come, Montague, for thou art early up
To see thy son and heir now early down.

MONTAGUE
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE  Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE, [seeing Romeo dead]
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE
Seal up the mouth of outrage for awhile,
Till we can clear these ambiguities
And know their spring, their head, their true
descent,
And then will I be general of your woes
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.--
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
I married them, and their stol'n marriage day
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayed by accident, and yesternight
Returned my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know, and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy. And if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed some hour before his time
Unto the rigor of severest law.

PRINCE
We still have known thee for a holy man.--
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say to this?

BALTHASAR
I brought my master news of Juliet's death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE
Give me the letter. I will look on it.--
[He takes Romeo's letter.]
Where is the County's page, that raised the
watch?--
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE
This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies?--Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love,
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.

CAPULET
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE  But I can give thee more,
For I will ray her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

PRINCE
A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished.
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
[All exit.]

===============================================

Macbeth
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/macbeth/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
Three Witches, the Weird Sisters
DUNCAN, king of Scotland
MALCOLM, his elder son
DONALBAIN, Duncan's younger son
MACBETH, thane of Glamis
LADY MACBETH
SEYTON, attendant to Macbeth
Three Murderers in Macbeth's service
Both attending upon Lady Macbeth:
  A Doctor
  A Gentlewoman
A Porter
BANQUO, commander, with Macbeth, of Duncan's army
FLEANCE, his son
MACDUFF, a Scottish noble
LADY MACDUFF
Their son
Scottish Nobles:
  LENNOX
  ROSS
  ANGUS
  MENTEITH
  CAITHNESS
SIWARD, commander of the English forces
YOUNG SIWARD, Siward's son
A Captain in Duncan's army
An Old Man
A Doctor at the English court
HECATE
Apparitions: an Armed Head, a Bloody Child, a Crowned Child, and eight nonspeaking kings
Three Messengers, Three Servants, a Lord, a Soldier
Attendants, a Sewer, Servants, Lords, Thanes, Soldiers (all nonspeaking)


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Thunder and Lightning. Enter three Witches.]


FIRST WITCH
When shall we three meet again?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?

SECOND WITCH
When the hurly-burly's done,
When the battle's lost and won.

THIRD WITCH
That will be ere the set of sun.

FIRST WITCH
Where the place?

SECOND WITCH  Upon the heath.

THIRD WITCH
There to meet with Macbeth.

FIRST WITCH  I come, Graymalkin.

SECOND WITCH  Paddock calls.

THIRD WITCH  Anon.

ALL
Fair is foul, and foul is fair;
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Alarum within. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm,
Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding
Captain.]


DUNCAN
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.

MALCOLM  This is the sergeant
Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
'Gainst my captivity.--Hail, brave friend!
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.

CAPTAIN  Doubtful it stood,
As two spent swimmers that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald
(Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
The multiplying villainies of nature
Do swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Showed like a rebel's whore. But all's too weak;
For brave Macbeth (well he deserves that name),
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandished steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution,
Like Valor's minion, carved out his passage
Till he faced the slave;
Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseamed him from the nave to th' chops,
And fixed his head upon our battlements.

DUNCAN
O valiant cousin, worthy gentleman!

CAPTAIN
As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring whence comfort seemed to
come
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had, with valor armed,
Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbished arms and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.

DUNCAN
Dismayed not this our captains, Macbeth and
Banquo?

CAPTAIN
Yes, as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds
Or memorize another Golgotha,
I cannot tell--
But I am faint. My gashes cry for help.

DUNCAN
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds:
They smack of honor both.--Go, get him surgeons.
[The Captain is led off by Attendants.]

[Enter Ross and Angus.]

Who comes here?

MALCOLM  The worthy Thane of Ross.

LENNOX
What a haste looks through his eyes!
So should he look that seems to speak things
strange.

ROSS  God save the King.

DUNCAN  Whence cam'st thou, worthy thane?

ROSS  From Fife, great king,
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapped in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point, rebellious arm 'gainst arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit. And to conclude,
The victory fell on us.

DUNCAN  Great happiness!

ROSS  That now Sweno,
The Norways' king, craves composition.
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's Inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

DUNCAN
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest. Go, pronounce his present
death,
And with his former title greet Macbeth.

ROSS  I'll see it done.

DUNCAN
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Thunder. Enter the three Witches.]


FIRST WITCH  Where hast thou been, sister?

SECOND WITCH  Killing swine.

THIRD WITCH  Sister, where thou?

FIRST WITCH
A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap
And munched and munched and munched. "Give
me," quoth I.
"Aroint thee, witch," the rump-fed runnion cries.
Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' th' Tiger;
But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.

SECOND WITCH
I'll give thee a wind.

FIRST WITCH
Th' art kind.

THIRD WITCH
And I another.

FIRST WITCH
I myself have all the other,
And the very ports they blow;
All the quarters that they know
I' th' shipman's card.
I'll drain him dry as hay.
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouse lid.
He shall live a man forbid.
Weary sev'nnights, nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine.
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tossed.
Look what I have.

SECOND WITCH  Show me, show me.

FIRST WITCH
Here I have a pilot's thumb,
Wracked as homeward he did come.	[Drum within.]

THIRD WITCH
A drum, a drum!
Macbeth doth come.

ALL, [dancing in a circle]
The Weird Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace, the charm's wound up.

[Enter Macbeth and Banquo.]


MACBETH
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.

BANQUO
How far is 't called to Forres?--What are these,
So withered, and so wild in their attire,
That look not like th' inhabitants o' th' Earth
And yet are on 't?--Live you? Or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand
me
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.

MACBETH  Speak if you can. What are you?

FIRST WITCH
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!

SECOND WITCH
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!

THIRD WITCH
All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!

BANQUO
Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair?--I' th' name of truth,
Are you fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly you show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favors nor your hate.

FIRST WITCH  Hail!

SECOND WITCH  Hail!

THIRD WITCH  Hail!

FIRST WITCH
Lesser than Macbeth and greater.

SECOND WITCH
Not so happy, yet much happier.

THIRD WITCH
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!

FIRST WITCH
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!

MACBETH
Stay, you imperfect speakers. Tell me more.
By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis.
But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives
A prosperous gentleman, and to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.
[Witches vanish.]

BANQUO
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanished?

MACBETH
Into the air, and what seemed corporal melted,
As breath into the wind. Would they had stayed!

BANQUO
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?

MACBETH
Your children shall be kings.

BANQUO  You shall be king.

MACBETH
And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?

BANQUO
To th' selfsame tune and words.--Who's here?

[Enter Ross and Angus.]


ROSS
The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
The news of thy success, and, when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
In viewing o'er the rest o' th' selfsame day
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale
Came post with post, and every one did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
And poured them down before him.

ANGUS  We are sent
To give thee from our royal master thanks,
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.

ROSS
And for an earnest of a greater honor,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor,
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane,
For it is thine.

BANQUO  What, can the devil speak true?

MACBETH
The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
In borrowed robes?

ANGUS  Who was the Thane lives yet,
But under heavy judgment bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was
combined
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
He labored in his country's wrack, I know not;
But treasons capital, confessed and proved,
Have overthrown him.

MACBETH, [aside]  Glamis and Thane of Cawdor!
The greatest is behind. [To Ross and Angus.] Thanks
for your pains.
[Aside to Banquo.] Do you not hope your children
shall be kings,
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
Promised no less to them?

BANQUO  That, trusted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange.
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
Win us with honest trifles, to betray 's
In deepest consequence.--
Cousins, a word, I pray you.	[They step aside.]

MACBETH, [aside]  Two truths are told
As happy prologues to the swelling act
Of the imperial theme.--I thank you, gentlemen.
[Aside.] This supernatural soliciting
Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,
Why hath it given me earnest of success
Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs
Against the use of nature? Present fears
Are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of man
That function is smothered in surmise,
And nothing is but what is not.

BANQUO  Look how our partner's rapt.

MACBETH, [aside]
If chance will have me king, why, chance may
crown me
Without my stir.

BANQUO  New honors come upon him,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mold
But with the aid of use.

MACBETH, [aside]  Come what come may,
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

BANQUO
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.

MACBETH
Give me your favor. My dull brain was wrought
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
Are registered where every day I turn
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
[Aside to Banquo.] Think upon what hath chanced,
and at more time,
The interim having weighed it, let us speak
Our free hearts each to other.

BANQUO  Very gladly.

MACBETH  Till then, enough.--Come, friends.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Flourish. Enter King Duncan, Lennox, Malcolm,
Donalbain, and Attendants.]


DUNCAN
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet returned?

MALCOLM  My liege,
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
With one that saw him die, who did report
That very frankly he confessed his treasons,
Implored your Highness' pardon, and set forth
A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
Became him like the leaving it. He died
As one that had been studied in his death
To throw away the dearest thing he owed
As 'twere a careless trifle.

DUNCAN  There's no art
To find the mind's construction in the face.
He was a gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.

[Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.]

O worthiest cousin,
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
More is thy due than more than all can pay.

MACBETH
The service and the loyalty I owe
In doing it pays itself. Your Highness' part
Is to receive our duties, and our duties
Are to your throne and state children and servants,
Which do but what they should by doing everything
Safe toward your love and honor.

DUNCAN  Welcome hither.
I have begun to plant thee and will labor
To make thee full of growing.--Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserved nor must be known
No less to have done so, let me enfold thee
And hold thee to my heart.

BANQUO  There, if I grow,
The harvest is your own.

DUNCAN  My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow.--Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know
We will establish our estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland; which honor must
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
On all deservers.--From hence to Inverness
And bind us further to you.

MACBETH
The rest is labor which is not used for you.
I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful
The hearing of my wife with your approach.
So humbly take my leave.

DUNCAN  My worthy Cawdor.

MACBETH, [aside]
The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
On which I must fall down or else o'erleap,
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
Let not light see my black and deep desires.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
[He exits.]

DUNCAN
True, worthy Banquo. He is full so valiant,
And in his commendations I am fed:
It is a banquet to me.--Let's after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome.
It is a peerless kinsman.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Macbeth's Wife, alone, with a letter.]


LADY MACBETH, [reading the letter]  They met me in the
day of success, and I have learned by the perfect'st
report they have more in them than mortal knowledge.
When I burned in desire to question them further, they
made themselves air, into which they vanished.
Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives
from the King, who all-hailed me "Thane of Cawdor,"
by which title, before, these Weird Sisters saluted me
and referred me to the coming on of time with "Hail,
king that shalt be." This have I thought good to deliver
thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou
might'st not lose the dues of rejoicing by being ignorant
of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy
heart, and farewell.
Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature;
It is too full o' th' milk of human kindness
To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great,
Art not without ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst
highly,
That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false
And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou 'dst have, great
Glamis,
That which cries "Thus thou must do," if thou have
it,
And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear
And chastise with the valor of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crowned withal.

[Enter Messenger.]

What is your tidings?

MESSENGER
The King comes here tonight.

LADY MACBETH  Thou 'rt mad to say it.
Is not thy master with him, who, were 't so,
Would have informed for preparation?

MESSENGER
So please you, it is true. Our thane is coming.
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his message.

LADY MACBETH  Give him tending.
He brings great news.	[Messenger exits.]
The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
Of direst cruelty. Make thick my blood.
Stop up th' access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
Th' effect and it. Come to my woman's breasts
And take my milk for gall, you murd'ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature's mischief. Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
To cry "Hold, hold!"

[Enter Macbeth.]

Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor,
Greater than both by the all-hail hereafter!
Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.

MACBETH  My dearest love,
Duncan comes here tonight.

LADY MACBETH  And when goes hence?

MACBETH
Tomorrow, as he purposes.

LADY MACBETH  O, never
Shall sun that morrow see!
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Look like the time. Bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue. Look like th' innocent
flower,
But be the serpent under 't. He that's coming
Must be provided for; and you shall put
This night's great business into my dispatch,
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

MACBETH
We will speak further.

LADY MACBETH  Only look up clear.
To alter favor ever is to fear.
Leave all the rest to me.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Hautboys and Torches. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm,
Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus, and
Attendants.]


DUNCAN
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.

BANQUO  This guest of summer,
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath
Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze,
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle.
Where they most breed and haunt, I have
observed,
The air is delicate.

[Enter Lady Macbeth.]


DUNCAN  See, see our honored hostess!--
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains
And thank us for your trouble.

LADY MACBETH  All our service,
In every point twice done and then done double,
Were poor and single business to contend
Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
Your Majesty loads our house. For those of old,
And the late dignities heaped up to them,
We rest your hermits.

DUNCAN  Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath helped
him
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guest tonight.

LADY MACBETH  Your servants ever
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt
To make their audit at your Highness' pleasure,
Still to return your own.

DUNCAN  Give me your hand.

[Taking her hand.]
Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly
And shall continue our graces towards him.
By your leave, hostess.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Hautboys. Torches. Enter a Sewer and divers Servants
with dishes and service over the stage. Then enter
Macbeth.]


MACBETH
If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
It were done quickly. If th' assassination
Could trammel up the consequence and catch
With his surcease success, that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We'd jump the life to come. But in these cases
We still have judgment here, that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
To plague th' inventor. This even-handed justice
Commends th' ingredience of our poisoned chalice
To our own lips. He's here in double trust:
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of his taking-off;
And pity, like a naked newborn babe
Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
And falls on th' other--

[Enter Lady Macbeth.]

How now, what news?

LADY MACBETH
He has almost supped. Why have you left the
chamber?

MACBETH
Hath he asked for me?

LADY MACBETH  Know you not he has?

MACBETH
We will proceed no further in this business.
He hath honored me of late, and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.

LADY MACBETH  Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dressed yourself? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely? From this time
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
To be the same in thine own act and valor
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would,"
Like the poor cat i' th' adage?

MACBETH  Prithee, peace.
I dare do all that may become a man.
Who dares do more is none.

LADY MACBETH  What beast was 't,
then,
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man;
And to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
They have made themselves, and that their fitness
now
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me.
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums
And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.

MACBETH  If we should fail--

LADY MACBETH  We fail?
But screw your courage to the sticking place
And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep
(Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
A limbeck only. When in swinish sleep
Their drenched natures lies as in a death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th' unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell?

MACBETH  Bring forth men-children only,
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
When we have marked with blood those sleepy two
Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
That they have done 't?

LADY MACBETH  Who dares receive it other,
As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar
Upon his death?

MACBETH  I am settled and bend up
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show.
False face must hide what the false heart doth
know.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Banquo, and Fleance with a torch before him.]


BANQUO  How goes the night, boy?

FLEANCE
The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.

BANQUO  And she goes down at twelve.

FLEANCE  I take 't 'tis later, sir.

BANQUO
Hold, take my sword.	[He gives his sword to Fleance.]
There's husbandry in heaven;
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repose.

[Enter Macbeth, and a Servant with a torch.]

Give me my sword.--Who's
there?

MACBETH  A friend.

BANQUO
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King's abed.
He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
Sent forth great largess to your offices.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
In measureless content.
[He gives Macbeth a jewel.]

MACBETH  Being unprepared,
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.

BANQUO  All's well.
I dreamt last night of the three Weird Sisters.
To you they have showed some truth.

MACBETH  I think not of
them.
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that
business,
If you would grant the time.

BANQUO  At your kind'st leisure.

MACBETH
If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
It shall make honor for you.

BANQUO  So I lose none
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
I shall be counseled.

MACBETH  Good repose the while.

BANQUO  Thanks, sir. The like to you.
[Banquo and Fleance exit.]

MACBETH
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.
[Servant exits.]
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch
thee.
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable
As this which now I draw.	[He draws his dagger.]
Thou marshal'st me the way that I was going,
And such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools o' th' other senses
Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
And, on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,
Which was not so before. There's no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs
Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one-half world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate's off'rings, and withered murder,
Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his
design
Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabouts
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
[A bell rings.]
I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
That summons thee to heaven or to hell.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lady Macbeth.]


LADY MACBETH
That which hath made them drunk hath made me
bold.
What hath quenched them hath given me fire.
Hark!--Peace.
It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it.
The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged
their possets,
That death and nature do contend about them
Whether they live or die.

MACBETH, [within]  Who's there? what, ho!

LADY MACBETH
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
And 'tis not done. Th' attempt and not the deed
Confounds us. Hark!--I laid their daggers ready;
He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
My father as he slept, I had done 't.

[Enter Macbeth with bloody daggers.]

My husband?

MACBETH
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?

LADY MACBETH
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
Did not you speak?

MACBETH  When?

LADY MACBETH  Now.

MACBETH  As I descended?

LADY MACBETH  Ay.

MACBETH  Hark!--Who lies i' th' second chamber?

LADY MACBETH  Donalbain.

MACBETH  This is a sorry sight.

LADY MACBETH
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

MACBETH
There's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried
"Murder!"
That they did wake each other. I stood and heard
them.
But they did say their prayers and addressed them
Again to sleep.

LADY MACBETH  There are two lodged together.

MACBETH
One cried "God bless us" and "Amen" the other,
As they had seen me with these hangman's hands,
List'ning their fear. I could not say "Amen"
When they did say "God bless us."

LADY MACBETH  Consider it not so deeply.

MACBETH
But wherefore could not I pronounce "Amen"?
I had most need of blessing, and "Amen"
Stuck in my throat.

LADY MACBETH  These deeds must not be thought
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.

MACBETH
Methought I heard a voice cry "Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep"--the innocent sleep,
Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care,
The death of each day's life, sore labor's bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
Chief nourisher in life's feast.

LADY MACBETH  What do you mean?

MACBETH
Still it cried "Sleep no more!" to all the house.
"Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore
Cawdor
Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more."

LADY MACBETH
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble strength to think
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.--
Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
They must lie there. Go, carry them and smear
The sleepy grooms with blood.

MACBETH  I'll go no more.
I am afraid to think what I have done.
Look on 't again I dare not.

LADY MACBETH  Infirm of purpose!
Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
Are but as pictures. 'Tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
For it must seem their guilt.
[She exits with the daggers. Knock within.]

MACBETH  Whence is that
knocking?
How is 't with me when every noise appalls me?
What hands are here! Ha, they pluck out mine eyes.
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.

[Enter Lady Macbeth.]


LADY MACBETH
My hands are of your color, but I shame
To wear a heart so white.	[Knock.]
I hear a knocking
At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
A little water clears us of this deed.
How easy is it, then! Your constancy
Hath left you unattended.	[Knock.]
Hark, more knocking.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.

MACBETH
To know my deed 'twere best not know myself.
[Knock.]
Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou
couldst.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Knocking within. Enter a Porter.]


PORTER  Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were
porter of hell gate, he should have old turning the
key. [(Knock.)] Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i'
th' name of Beelzebub? Here's a farmer that hanged
himself on th' expectation of plenty. Come in time!
Have napkins enough about you; here you'll sweat
for 't. [(Knock.)] Knock, knock! Who's there, in th'
other devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator
that could swear in both the scales against either
scale, who committed treason enough for God's
sake yet could not equivocate to heaven. O, come in,
equivocator. [(Knock.)] Knock, knock, knock! Who's
there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither for
stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor. Here
you may roast your goose. [(Knock.)] Knock, knock!
Never at quiet.--What are you?--But this place is
too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter it no further. I had
thought to have let in some of all professions that go
the primrose way to th' everlasting bonfire. [(Knock.)]
Anon, anon!

[The Porter opens the door to Macduff and Lennox.]

I pray you, remember the porter.

MACDUFF
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed
That you do lie so late?

PORTER  Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second
cock, and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three
things.

MACDUFF  What three things does drink especially
provoke?

PORTER  Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine.
Lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. It provokes
the desire, but it takes away the performance.
Therefore much drink may be said to be an
equivocator with lechery. It makes him, and it
mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it
persuades him and disheartens him; makes him
stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates
him in a sleep and, giving him the lie, leaves
him.

MACDUFF  I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.

PORTER  That it did, sir, i' th' very throat on me; but I
requited him for his lie, and, I think, being too
strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime,
yet I made a shift to cast him.

MACDUFF  Is thy master stirring?

[Enter Macbeth.]

Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.
[Porter exits.]

LENNOX
Good morrow, noble sir.

MACBETH  Good morrow, both.

MACDUFF
Is the King stirring, worthy thane?

MACBETH  Not yet.

MACDUFF
He did command me to call timely on him.
I have almost slipped the hour.

MACBETH  I'll bring you to him.

MACDUFF
I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
But yet 'tis one.

MACBETH
The labor we delight in physics pain.
This is the door.

MACDUFF  I'll make so bold to call,
For 'tis my limited service.	[Macduff exits.]

LENNOX  Goes the King hence today?

MACBETH  He does. He did appoint so.

LENNOX
The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i' th' air, strange screams of
death,
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion and confused events
New hatched to th' woeful time. The obscure bird
Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth
Was feverous and did shake.

MACBETH  'Twas a rough night.

LENNOX
My young remembrance cannot parallel
A fellow to it.

[Enter Macduff.]


MACDUFF  O horror, horror, horror!
Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!

MACBETH AND LENNOX  What's the matter?

MACDUFF
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
The life o' th' building.

MACBETH  What is 't you say? The life?

LENNOX  Mean you his Majesty?

MACDUFF
Approach the chamber and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.
See and then speak yourselves.
[Macbeth and Lennox exit.]
Awake, awake!
Ring the alarum bell.--Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain, Malcolm, awake!
Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
And look on death itself. Up, up, and see
The great doom's image. Malcolm, Banquo,
As from your graves rise up and walk like sprites
To countenance this horror.--Ring the bell.
[Bell rings.]

[Enter Lady Macbeth.]


LADY MACBETH  What's the business,
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!

MACDUFF  O gentle lady,
'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak.
The repetition in a woman's ear
Would murder as it fell.

[Enter Banquo.]

O Banquo, Banquo,
Our royal master's murdered.

LADY MACBETH  Woe, alas!
What, in our house?

BANQUO  Too cruel anywhere.--
Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself
And say it is not so.

[Enter Macbeth, Lennox, and Ross.]


MACBETH
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had lived a blessed time; for from this instant
There's nothing serious in mortality.
All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead.
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of.

[Enter Malcolm and Donalbain.]


DONALBAIN  What is amiss?

MACBETH  You are, and do not know 't.
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.

MACDUFF
Your royal father's murdered.

MALCOLM  O, by whom?

LENNOX
Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done 't.
Their hands and faces were all badged with blood.
So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
Upon their pillows. They stared and were distracted.
No man's life was to be trusted with them.

MACBETH
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
That I did kill them.

MACDUFF  Wherefore did you so?

MACBETH
Who can be wise, amazed, temp'rate, and furious,
Loyal, and neutral, in a moment? No man.
Th' expedition of my violent love
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature
For ruin's wasteful entrance; there the murderers,
Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers
Unmannerly breeched with gore. Who could refrain
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
Courage to make 's love known?

LADY MACBETH  Help me hence, ho!

MACDUFF
Look to the lady.

MALCOLM, [aside to Donalbain]  Why do we hold our
tongues,
That most may claim this argument for ours?

DONALBAIN, [aside to Malcolm]
What should be spoken here, where our fate,
Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
Let's away. Our tears are not yet brewed.

MALCOLM, [aside to Donalbain]
Nor our strong sorrow upon the foot of motion.

BANQUO  Look to the lady.
[Lady Macbeth is assisted to leave.]
And when we have our naked frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure, let us meet
And question this most bloody piece of work
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
Against the undivulged pretense I fight
Of treasonous malice.

MACDUFF  And so do I.

ALL  So all.

MACBETH
Let's briefly put on manly readiness
And meet i' th' hall together.

ALL  Well contented.
[All but Malcolm and Donalbain exit.]

MALCOLM
What will you do? Let's not consort with them.
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.

DONALBAIN
To Ireland I. Our separated fortune
Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are,
There's daggers in men's smiles. The near in blood,
The nearer bloody.

MALCOLM  This murderous shaft that's shot
Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse,
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking
But shift away. There's warrant in that theft
Which steals itself when there's no mercy left.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Ross with an Old Man.]


OLD MAN
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore
night
Hath trifled former knowings.

ROSS  Ha, good father,
Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
Threatens his bloody stage. By th' clock 'tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
Is 't night's predominance or the day's shame
That darkness does the face of earth entomb
When living light should kiss it?

OLD MAN  'Tis unnatural,
Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last
A falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place,
Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.

ROSS
And Duncan's horses (a thing most strange and
certain),
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would
Make war with mankind.

OLD MAN  'Tis said they eat each
other.

ROSS
They did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes
That looked upon 't.

[Enter Macduff.]

Here comes the good
Macduff.--
How goes the world, sir, now?

MACDUFF  Why, see you not?

ROSS
Is 't known who did this more than bloody deed?

MACDUFF
Those that Macbeth hath slain.

ROSS  Alas the day,
What good could they pretend?

MACDUFF  They were suborned.
Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.

ROSS  'Gainst nature still!
Thriftless ambition, that will ravin up
Thine own lives' means. Then 'tis most like
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.

MACDUFF
He is already named and gone to Scone
To be invested.

ROSS  Where is Duncan's body?

MACDUFF  Carried to Colmekill,
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
And guardian of their bones.

ROSS  Will you to Scone?

MACDUFF
No, cousin, I'll to Fife.

ROSS  Well, I will thither.

MACDUFF
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu,
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new.

ROSS  Farewell, father.

OLD MAN
God's benison go with you and with those
That would make good of bad and friends of foes.
[All exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Banquo.]


BANQUO
Thou hast it now--king, Cawdor, Glamis, all
As the Weird Women promised, and I fear
Thou played'st most foully for 't. Yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity,
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings. If there come truth from them
(As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.

[Sennet sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady
Macbeth, Lennox, Ross, Lords, and Attendants.]


MACBETH
Here's our chief guest.

LADY MACBETH  If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feast
And all-thing unbecoming.

MACBETH
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
And I'll request your presence.

BANQUO  Let your Highness
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
Forever knit.

MACBETH  Ride you this afternoon?

BANQUO  Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH
We should have else desired your good advice
(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
In this day's council, but we'll take tomorrow.
Is 't far you ride?

BANQUO
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
'Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night
For a dark hour or twain.

MACBETH  Fail not our feast.

BANQUO  My lord, I will not.

MACBETH
We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed
In England and in Ireland, not confessing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu,
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?

BANQUO
Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon 's.

MACBETH
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
And so I do commend you to their backs.
Farewell.	[Banquo exits.]
Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night. To make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till suppertime alone. While then, God be with you.
[Lords and all but Macbeth and a Servant exit.]
Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
Our pleasure?

SERVANT
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.

MACBETH
Bring them before us.	[Servant exits.]
To be thus is nothing,
But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that which would be feared. 'Tis much he
dares,
And to that dauntless temper of his mind
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
To act in safety. There is none but he
Whose being I do fear; and under him
My genius is rebuked, as it is said
Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
When first they put the name of king upon me
And bade them speak to him. Then, prophet-like,
They hailed him father to a line of kings.
Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
And put a barren scepter in my grip,
Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so,
For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered,
Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man
To make them kings, the seeds of Banquo kings.
Rather than so, come fate into the list,
And champion me to th' utterance.--Who's there?

[Enter Servant and two Murderers.]

[To the Servant.] Now go to the door, and stay there
till we call.	[Servant exits.]
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

MURDERERS
It was, so please your Highness.

MACBETH  Well then, now
Have you considered of my speeches? Know
That it was he, in the times past, which held you
So under fortune, which you thought had been
Our innocent self. This I made good to you
In our last conference, passed in probation with you
How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the
instruments,
Who wrought with them, and all things else that
might
To half a soul and to a notion crazed
Say "Thus did Banquo."

FIRST MURDERER  You made it known to us.

MACBETH
I did so, and went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
Your patience so predominant in your nature
That you can let this go? Are you so gospeled
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave
And beggared yours forever?

FIRST MURDERER  We are men, my liege.

MACBETH
Ay, in the catalogue you go for men,
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels,
curs,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept
All by the name of dogs. The valued file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous nature
Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive
Particular addition, from the bill
That writes them all alike. And so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not i' th' worst rank of manhood, say 't,
And I will put that business in your bosoms
Whose execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect.

SECOND MURDERER  I am one, my liege,
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Hath so incensed that I am reckless what
I do to spite the world.

FIRST MURDERER  And I another
So weary with disasters, tugged with fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it or be rid on 't.

MACBETH  Both of you
Know Banquo was your enemy.

MURDERERS  True, my lord.

MACBETH
So is he mine, and in such bloody distance
That every minute of his being thrusts
Against my near'st of life. And though I could
With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
That I to your assistance do make love,
Masking the business from the common eye
For sundry weighty reasons.

SECOND MURDERER  We shall, my lord,
Perform what you command us.

FIRST MURDERER  Though our lives--

MACBETH
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at
most
I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' th' time,
The moment on 't, for 't must be done tonight
And something from the palace; always thought
That I require a clearness. And with him
(To leave no rubs nor botches in the work)
Fleance, his son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.
I'll come to you anon.

MURDERERS  We are resolved, my lord.

MACBETH
I'll call upon you straight. Abide within.
[Murderers exit.]
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight,
If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Macbeth's Lady and a Servant.]


LADY MACBETH  Is Banquo gone from court?

SERVANT
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.

LADY MACBETH
Say to the King I would attend his leisure
For a few words.

SERVANT  Madam, I will.	[He exits.]

LADY MACBETH  Naught's had, all's spent,
Where our desire is got without content.
'Tis safer to be that which we destroy
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

[Enter Macbeth.]

How now, my lord, why do you keep alone,
Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Should be without regard. What's done is done.

MACBETH
We have scorched the snake, not killed it.
She'll close and be herself whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds
suffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible dreams
That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave.
After life's fitful fever he sleeps well.
Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison,
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further.

LADY MACBETH  Come on, gentle my lord,
Sleek o'er your rugged looks. Be bright and jovial
Among your guests tonight.

MACBETH  So shall I, love,
And so I pray be you. Let your remembrance
Apply to Banquo; present him eminence
Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we
Must lave our honors in these flattering streams
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Disguising what they are.

LADY MACBETH  You must leave this.

MACBETH
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
Thou know'st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.

LADY MACBETH
But in them nature's copy's not eterne.

MACBETH
There's comfort yet; they are assailable.
Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
The shard-born beetle with his drowsy hums
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
A deed of dreadful note.

LADY MACBETH  What's to be done?

MACBETH
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed.--Come, seeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to th' rooky wood.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whiles night's black agents to their preys do
rouse.--
Thou marvel'st at my words, but hold thee still.
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
So prithee go with me.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter three Murderers.]


FIRST MURDERER
But who did bid thee join with us?

THIRD MURDERER  Macbeth.

SECOND MURDERER, [to the First Murderer]
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
Our offices and what we have to do
To the direction just.

FIRST MURDERER  Then stand with us.--
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveler apace
To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
The subject of our watch.

THIRD MURDERER  Hark, I hear horses.

BANQUO, [within]  Give us a light there, ho!

SECOND MURDERER  Then 'tis he. The rest
That are within the note of expectation
Already are i' th' court.

FIRST MURDERER  His horses go about.

THIRD MURDERER
Almost a mile; but he does usually
(So all men do) from hence to th' palace gate
Make it their walk.

[Enter Banquo and Fleance, with a torch.]


SECOND MURDERER  A light, a light!

THIRD MURDERER  'Tis he.

FIRST MURDERER  Stand to 't.

BANQUO, [to Fleance]  It will be rain tonight.

FIRST MURDERER  Let it come down!
[The three Murderers attack.]

BANQUO
O treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
Thou mayst revenge--O slave!
[He dies. Fleance exits.]

THIRD MURDERER
Who did strike out the light?

FIRST MURDERER  Was 't not the way?

THIRD MURDERER  There's but one down. The son is
fled.

SECOND MURDERER  We have lost best half of our
affair.

FIRST MURDERER
Well, let's away and say how much is done.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Banquet prepared. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth,
Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants.]


MACBETH
You know your own degrees; sit down. At first
And last, the hearty welcome.	[They sit.]

LORDS  Thanks to your Majesty.

MACBETH
Ourself will mingle with society
And play the humble host.
Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
We will require her welcome.

LADY MACBETH
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
For my heart speaks they are welcome.

[Enter First Murderer to the door.]


MACBETH
See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
Both sides are even. Here I'll sit i' th' midst.
Be large in mirth. Anon we'll drink a measure
The table round. [He approaches the Murderer.] There's
blood upon thy face.

MURDERER  'Tis Banquo's then.

MACBETH
'Tis better thee without than he within.
Is he dispatched?

MURDERER
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.

MACBETH
Thou art the best o' th' cutthroats,
Yet he's good that did the like for Fleance.
If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.

MURDERER
Most royal sir, Fleance is 'scaped.

MACBETH, [aside]
Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect,
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
As broad and general as the casing air.
But now I am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in
To saucy doubts and fears.--But Banquo's safe?

MURDERER
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
The least a death to nature.

MACBETH  Thanks for that.
There the grown serpent lies. The worm that's fled
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
No teeth for th' present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
We'll hear ourselves again.	[Murderer exits.]

LADY MACBETH  My royal lord,
You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
That is not often vouched, while 'tis a-making,
'Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it.

[Enter the Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth's place.]


MACBETH, [to Lady Macbeth]  Sweet remembrancer!--
Now, good digestion wait on appetite
And health on both!

LENNOX  May 't please your Highness sit.

MACBETH
Here had we now our country's honor roofed,
Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
Than pity for mischance.

ROSS  His absence, sir,
Lays blame upon his promise. Please 't your
Highness
To grace us with your royal company?

MACBETH
The table's full.

LENNOX  Here is a place reserved, sir.

MACBETH  Where?

LENNOX
Here, my good lord. What is 't that moves your
Highness?

MACBETH
Which of you have done this?

LORDS  What, my good lord?

MACBETH, [to the Ghost]
Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake
Thy gory locks at me.

ROSS
Gentlemen, rise. His Highness is not well.

LADY MACBETH
Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus
And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat.
The fit is momentary; upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him
You shall offend him and extend his passion.
Feed and regard him not.	[Drawing Macbeth aside.]
Are you a man?

MACBETH
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appall the devil.

LADY MACBETH  O, proper stuff!
This is the very painting of your fear.
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
Impostors to true fear, would well become
A woman's story at a winter's fire,
Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
Why do you make such faces? When all's done,
You look but on a stool.

MACBETH
Prithee, see there. Behold, look! [To the Ghost.] Lo,
how say you?
Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.--
If charnel houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.	[Ghost exits.]

LADY MACBETH  What, quite unmanned in folly?

MACBETH
If I stand here, I saw him.

LADY MACBETH  Fie, for shame!

MACBETH
Blood hath been shed ere now, i' th' olden time,
Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been performed
Too terrible for the ear. The time has been
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end. But now they rise again
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns
And push us from our stools. This is more strange
Than such a murder is.

LADY MACBETH  My worthy lord,
Your noble friends do lack you.

MACBETH  I do forget.--
Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, love and health to
all.
Then I'll sit down.--Give me some wine. Fill full.

[Enter Ghost.]

I drink to th' general joy o' th' whole table
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.
Would he were here! To all, and him we thirst,
And all to all.

LORDS  Our duties, and the pledge.
[They raise their drinking cups.]

MACBETH, [to the Ghost]
Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee.
Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with.

LADY MACBETH  Think of this, good
peers,
But as a thing of custom. 'Tis no other;
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

MACBETH, [to the Ghost]  What man dare, I dare.
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The armed rhinoceros, or th' Hyrcan tiger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Or be alive again
And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mock'ry, hence!	[Ghost exits.]
Why so, being gone,
I am a man again.--Pray you sit still.

LADY MACBETH
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good
meeting
With most admired disorder.

MACBETH  Can such things be
And overcome us like a summer's cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe
When now I think you can behold such sights
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
When mine is blanched with fear.

ROSS  What sights, my
lord?

LADY MACBETH
I pray you, speak not. He grows worse and worse.
Question enrages him. At once, good night.
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.

LENNOX  Good night, and better health
Attend his Majesty.

LADY MACBETH  A kind good night to all.
[Lords and all but Macbeth and Lady Macbeth exit.]

MACBETH
It will have blood, they say; blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and trees to
speak.
Augurs and understood relations have
By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought
forth
The secret'st man of blood.--What is the night?

LADY MACBETH
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

MACBETH
How say'st thou that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding?

LADY MACBETH  Did you send to him, sir?

MACBETH
I hear it by the way; but I will send.
There's not a one of them but in his house
I keep a servant fee'd. I will tomorrow
(And betimes I will) to the Weird Sisters.
More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know
By the worst means the worst. For mine own good,
All causes shall give way. I am in blood
Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er.
Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.

LADY MACBETH
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.

MACBETH
Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
We are yet but young in deed.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Thunder. Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecate.]


FIRST WITCH
Why, how now, Hecate? You look angerly.

HECATE
Have I not reason, beldams as you are?
Saucy and overbold, how did you dare
To trade and traffic with Macbeth
In riddles and affairs of death,
And I, the mistress of your charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never called to bear my part
Or show the glory of our art?
And which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward son,
Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now. Get you gone,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me i' th' morning. Thither he
Will come to know his destiny.
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Your charms and everything beside.
I am for th' air. This night I'll spend
Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere noon.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap'rous drop profound.
I'll catch it ere it come to ground,
And that, distilled by magic sleights,
Shall raise such artificial sprites
As by the strength of their illusion
Shall draw him on to his confusion.
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
And you all know, security
Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
[Music and a song.]
Hark! I am called. My little spirit, see,
Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.	[Hecate exits.]
[Sing within "Come away, come away," etc.]

FIRST WITCH
Come, let's make haste. She'll soon be back again.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Lennox and another Lord.]


LENNOX
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
Which can interpret farther. Only I say
Things have been strangely borne. The gracious
Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
And the right valiant Banquo walked too late,
Whom you may say, if 't please you, Fleance killed,
For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought how monstrous
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
To kill their gracious father? Damned fact,
How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight
In pious rage the two delinquents tear
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely, too,
For 'twould have angered any heart alive
To hear the men deny 't. So that I say
He has borne all things well. And I do think
That had he Duncan's sons under his key
(As, an 't please heaven, he shall not) they should
find
What 'twere to kill a father. So should Fleance.
But peace. For from broad words, and 'cause he
failed
His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear
Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?

LORD  The son of Duncan
(From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth)
Lives in the English court and is received
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
That the malevolence of fortune nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
Is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid
To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward
That, by the help of these (with Him above
To ratify the work), we may again
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage, and receive free honors,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate the King that he
Prepares for some attempt of war.

LENNOX  Sent he to Macduff?

LORD
He did, and with an absolute "Sir, not I,"
The cloudy messenger turns me his back
And hums, as who should say "You'll rue the time
That clogs me with this answer."

LENNOX  And that well might
Advise him to a caution t' hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England and unfold
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering country
Under a hand accursed.

LORD  I'll send my prayers with him.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Thunder. Enter the three Witches.]


FIRST WITCH
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.

SECOND WITCH
Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.

THIRD WITCH
Harpier cries "'Tis time, 'tis time!"

FIRST WITCH
Round about the cauldron go;
In the poisoned entrails throw.
Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Sweltered venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i' th' charmed pot.
[The Witches circle the cauldron.]

ALL
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.

SECOND WITCH
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the cauldron boil and bake.
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
Adder's fork and blindworm's sting,
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

ALL
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.

THIRD WITCH
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witch's mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravined salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digged i' th' dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew,
Gall of goat and slips of yew
Slivered in the moon's eclipse,
Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-delivered by a drab,
Make the gruel thick and slab.
Add thereto a tiger's chaudron
For th' ingredience of our cauldron.

ALL
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.

SECOND WITCH
Cool it with a baboon's blood.
Then the charm is firm and good.

[Enter Hecate to the other three Witches.]


HECATE
O, well done! I commend your pains,
And everyone shall share i' th' gains.
And now about the cauldron sing
Like elves and fairies in a ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.
[Music and a song: "Black Spirits," etc. Hecate exits.]

SECOND WITCH
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
Open, locks,
Whoever knocks.

[Enter Macbeth.]


MACBETH
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?
What is 't you do?

ALL  A deed without a name.

MACBETH
I conjure you by that which you profess
(Howe'er you come to know it), answer me.
Though you untie the winds and let them fight
Against the churches, though the yeasty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up,
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown
down,
Though castles topple on their warders' heads,
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to their foundations, though the
treasure
Of nature's germens tumble all together
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
To what I ask you.

FIRST WITCH  Speak.

SECOND WITCH  Demand.

THIRD WITCH  We'll answer.

FIRST WITCH
Say if th' hadst rather hear it from our mouths
Or from our masters'.

MACBETH  Call 'em. Let me see 'em.

FIRST WITCH
Pour in sow's blood that hath eaten
Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten
From the murderers' gibbet throw
Into the flame.

ALL  Come high or low;
Thyself and office deftly show.

[Thunder. First Apparition, an Armed Head.]


MACBETH
Tell me, thou unknown power--

FIRST WITCH  He knows thy
thought.
Hear his speech but say thou naught.

FIRST APPARITION
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff!
Beware the Thane of Fife! Dismiss me. Enough.
[He descends.]

MACBETH
Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks.
Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word
more--

FIRST WITCH
He will not be commanded. Here's another
More potent than the first.

[Thunder. Second Apparition, a Bloody Child.]


SECOND APPARITION  Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!--

MACBETH  Had I three ears, I'd hear thee.

SECOND APPARITION
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn
The power of man, for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.	[He descends.]

MACBETH
Then live, Macduff; what need I fear of thee?
But yet I'll make assurance double sure
And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live,
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of thunder.

[Thunder. Third Apparition, a Child Crowned, with a tree
in his hand.]

What is this
That rises like the issue of a king
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of sovereignty?

ALL  Listen but speak not to 't.

THIRD APPARITION
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.
Macbeth shall never vanquished be until
Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
Shall come against him.	[He descends.]

MACBETH  That will never be.
Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
Unfix his earthbound root? Sweet bodements, good!
Rebellious dead, rise never till the Wood
Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
Throbs to know one thing. Tell me, if your art
Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever
Reign in this kingdom?

ALL  Seek to know no more.

MACBETH
I will be satisfied. Deny me this,
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know!
[Cauldron sinks. Hautboys.]
Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?

FIRST WITCH  Show.

SECOND WITCH  Show.

THIRD WITCH  Show.

ALL
Show his eyes and grieve his heart.
Come like shadows; so depart.

[A show of eight kings, the eighth king with a glass in
his hand, and Banquo last.]


MACBETH
Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!
Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
A third is like the former.--Filthy hags,
Why do you show me this?--A fourth? Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to th' crack of doom?
Another yet? A seventh? I'll see no more.
And yet the eighth appears who bears a glass
Which shows me many more, and some I see
That twofold balls and treble scepters carry.
Horrible sight! Now I see 'tis true,
For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me
And points at them for his.
[The Apparitions disappear.]
What, is this so?

FIRST WITCH
Ay, sir, all this is so. But why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites
And show the best of our delights.
I'll charm the air to give a sound
While you perform your antic round,
That this great king may kindly say
Our duties did his welcome pay.
[Music. The Witches dance and vanish.]

MACBETH
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
Stand aye accursed in the calendar!--
Come in, without there.

[Enter Lennox.]


LENNOX  What's your Grace's will?

MACBETH
Saw you the Weird Sisters?

LENNOX  No, my lord.

MACBETH
Came they not by you?

LENNOX  No, indeed, my lord.

MACBETH
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
And damned all those that trust them! I did hear
The galloping of horse. Who was 't came by?

LENNOX
'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Macduff is fled to England.

MACBETH  Fled to England?

LENNOX  Ay, my good lord.

MACBETH, [aside]
Time, thou anticipat'st my dread exploits.
The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and
done:
The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
Seize upon Fife, give to th' edge o' th' sword
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.
But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen?
Come bring me where they are.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Macduff's Wife, her Son, and Ross.]


LADY MACDUFF
What had he done to make him fly the land?

ROSS
You must have patience, madam.

LADY MACDUFF  He had none.
His flight was madness. When our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.

ROSS  You know not
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.

LADY MACDUFF
Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion and his titles in a place
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear, and nothing is the love,
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.

ROSS  My dearest coz,
I pray you school yourself. But for your husband,
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o' th' season. I dare not speak much
further;
But cruel are the times when we are traitors
And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Each way and move--I take my leave of you.
Shall not be long but I'll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
To what they were before.--My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you.

LADY MACDUFF
Fathered he is, and yet he's fatherless.

ROSS
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
I take my leave at once.	[Ross exits.]

LADY MACDUFF  Sirrah, your father's dead.
And what will you do now? How will you live?

SON
As birds do, mother.

LADY MACDUFF  What, with worms and flies?

SON
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.

LADY MACDUFF
Poor bird, thou 'dst never fear the net nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin.

SON
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set
for.
My father is not dead, for all your saying.

LADY MACDUFF
Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for a father?

SON  Nay, how will you do for a husband?

LADY MACDUFF
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.

SON  Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.

LADY MACDUFF  Thou speak'st with all thy wit,
And yet, i' faith, with wit enough for thee.

SON  Was my father a traitor, mother?

LADY MACDUFF  Ay, that he was.

SON  What is a traitor?

LADY MACDUFF  Why, one that swears and lies.

SON  And be all traitors that do so?

LADY MACDUFF  Every one that does so is a traitor
and must be hanged.

SON  And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?

LADY MACDUFF  Every one.

SON  Who must hang them?

LADY MACDUFF  Why, the honest men.

SON  Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there
are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest
men and hang up them.

LADY MACDUFF  Now God help thee, poor monkey! But
how wilt thou do for a father?

SON  If he were dead, you'd weep for him. If you would
not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a
new father.

LADY MACDUFF  Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
Bless you, fair dame. I am not to you known,
Though in your state of honor I am perfect.
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly.
If you will take a homely man's advice,
Be not found here. Hence with your little ones!
To fright you thus methinks I am too savage;
To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve
you!
I dare abide no longer.	[Messenger exits.]

LADY MACDUFF  Whither should I fly?
I have done no harm. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
Do I put up that womanly defense
To say I have done no harm?

[Enter Murderers.]

What are these faces?

MURDERER  Where is your husband?

LADY MACDUFF
I hope in no place so unsanctified
Where such as thou mayst find him.

MURDERER  He's a traitor.

SON
Thou liest, thou shag-eared villain!

MURDERER  What, you egg?
[Stabbing him.] Young fry of treachery!

SON  He has killed
me, mother.
Run away, I pray you.
[Lady Macduff exits, crying "Murder!" followed by the
Murderers bearing the Son's body.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Malcolm and Macduff.]


MALCOLM
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.

MACDUFF  Let us rather
Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men,
Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yelled out
Like syllable of dolor.

MALCOLM  What I believe, I'll wail;
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so, perchance.
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest. You have loved him well.
He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but
something
You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
T' appease an angry god.

MACDUFF
I am not treacherous.

MALCOLM  But Macbeth is.
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your
pardon.
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
Though all things foul would wear the brows of
grace,
Yet grace must still look so.

MACDUFF  I have lost my hopes.

MALCOLM
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
Without leave-taking? I pray you,
Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
Whatever I shall think.

MACDUFF  Bleed, bleed, poor country!
Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy
wrongs;
The title is affeered.--Fare thee well, lord.
I would not be the villain that thou think'st
For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp,
And the rich East to boot.

MALCOLM  Be not offended.
I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke.
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think withal
There would be hands uplifted in my right;
And here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly thousands. But, for all this,
When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
By him that shall succeed.

MACDUFF  What should he be?

MALCOLM
It is myself I mean, in whom I know
All the particulars of vice so grafted
That, when they shall be opened, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
With my confineless harms.

MACDUFF  Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned
In evils to top Macbeth.

MALCOLM  I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
That has a name. But there's no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up
The cistern of my lust, and my desire
All continent impediments would o'erbear
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth
Than such an one to reign.

MACDUFF  Boundless intemperance
In nature is a tyranny. It hath been
Th' untimely emptying of the happy throne
And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours. You may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
And yet seem cold--the time you may so hoodwink.
We have willing dames enough. There cannot be
That vulture in you to devour so many
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclined.

MALCOLM  With this there grows
In my most ill-composed affection such
A stanchless avarice that, were I king,
I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
Desire his jewels, and this other's house;
And my more-having would be as a sauce
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.

MACDUFF  This avarice
Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear.
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
Of your mere own. All these are portable,
With other graces weighed.

MALCOLM
But I have none. The king-becoming graces,
As justice, verity, temp'rance, stableness,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no relish of them but abound
In the division of each several crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.

MACDUFF  O Scotland, Scotland!

MALCOLM
If such a one be fit to govern, speak.
I am as I have spoken.

MACDUFF  Fit to govern?
No, not to live.--O nation miserable,
With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
By his own interdiction stands accursed
And does blaspheme his breed?--Thy royal father
Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,
Oft'ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well.
These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
Hath banished me from Scotland.--O my breast,
Thy hope ends here!

MALCOLM  Macduff, this noble passion,
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
From overcredulous haste. But God above
Deal between thee and me, for even now
I put myself to thy direction and
Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myself
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
At no time broke my faith, would not betray
The devil to his fellow, and delight
No less in truth than life. My first false speaking
Was this upon myself. What I am truly
Is thine and my poor country's to command--
Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
Old Siward with ten thousand warlike men,
Already at a point, was setting forth.
Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted quarrel. Why are you silent?

MACDUFF
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
'Tis hard to reconcile.

[Enter a Doctor.]


MALCOLM  Well, more anon.--
Comes the King forth, I pray you?

DOCTOR
Ay, sir. There are a crew of wretched souls
That stay his cure. Their malady convinces
The great assay of art, but at his touch
(Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand)
They presently amend.

MALCOLM  I thank you, doctor.
[Doctor exits.]

MACDUFF
What's the disease he means?

MALCOLM  'Tis called the evil:
A most miraculous work in this good king,
Which often since my here-remain in England
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven
Himself best knows, but strangely visited people
All swoll'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers; and, 'tis spoken,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
And sundry blessings hang about his throne
That speak him full of grace.

[Enter Ross.]


MACDUFF  See who comes here.

MALCOLM
My countryman, but yet I know him not.

MACDUFF
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.

MALCOLM
I know him now.--Good God betimes remove
The means that makes us strangers!

ROSS  Sir, amen.

MACDUFF
Stands Scotland where it did?

ROSS  Alas, poor country,
Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot
Be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing
But who knows nothing is once seen to smile;
Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rent the air
Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems
A modern ecstasy. The dead man's knell
Is there scarce asked for who, and good men's lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they sicken.

MACDUFF
O relation too nice and yet too true!

MALCOLM  What's the newest grief?

ROSS
That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker.
Each minute teems a new one.

MACDUFF  How does my wife?

ROSS  Why, well.

MACDUFF  And all my children?

ROSS  Well too.

MACDUFF
The tyrant has not battered at their peace?

ROSS
No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.

MACDUFF
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes 't?

ROSS
When I came hither to transport the tidings
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
Of many worthy fellows that were out;
Which was to my belief witnessed the rather
For that I saw the tyrant's power afoot.
Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland
Would create soldiers, make our women fight
To doff their dire distresses.

MALCOLM  Be 't their comfort
We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
An older and a better soldier none
That Christendom gives out.

ROSS  Would I could answer
This comfort with the like. But I have words
That would be howled out in the desert air,
Where hearing should not latch them.

MACDUFF  What concern
they--
The general cause, or is it a fee-grief
Due to some single breast?

ROSS  No mind that's honest
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Pertains to you alone.

MACDUFF  If it be mine,
Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.

ROSS
Let not your ears despise my tongue forever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.

MACDUFF  Hum! I guess at it.

ROSS
Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes
Savagely slaughtered. To relate the manner
Were on the quarry of these murdered deer
To add the death of you.

MALCOLM  Merciful heaven!--
What, man, ne'er pull your hat upon your brows.
Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
Whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break.

MACDUFF  My children too?

ROSS
Wife, children, servants, all that could be found.

MACDUFF
And I must be from thence? My wife killed too?

ROSS  I have said.

MALCOLM  Be comforted.
Let's make us med'cines of our great revenge
To cure this deadly grief.

MACDUFF
He has no children. All my pretty ones?
Did you say "all"? O hell-kite! All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop?

MALCOLM  Dispute it like a man.

MACDUFF  I shall do so,
But I must also feel it as a man.
I cannot but remember such things were
That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.

MALCOLM
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
Convert to anger. Blunt not the heart; enrage it.

MACDUFF
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
Cut short all intermission! Front to front
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself.
Within my sword's length set him. If he 'scape,
Heaven forgive him too.

MALCOLM  This tune goes manly.
Come, go we to the King. Our power is ready;
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you
may.
The night is long that never finds the day.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman.]


DOCTOR  I have two nights watched with you but can
perceive no truth in your report. When was it she
last walked?

GENTLEWOMAN  Since his Majesty went into the field, I
have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown
upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper,
fold it, write upon 't, read it, afterwards seal it, and
again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast
sleep.

DOCTOR  A great perturbation in nature, to receive at
once the benefit of sleep and do the effects of
watching. In this slumb'ry agitation, besides her
walking and other actual performances, what at any
time have you heard her say?

GENTLEWOMAN  That, sir, which I will not report after
her.

DOCTOR  You may to me, and 'tis most meet you
should.

GENTLEWOMAN  Neither to you nor anyone, having no
witness to confirm my speech.

[Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper.]

Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise and,
upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.

DOCTOR  How came she by that light?

GENTLEWOMAN  Why, it stood by her. She has light by
her continually. 'Tis her command.

DOCTOR  You see her eyes are open.

GENTLEWOMAN  Ay, but their sense are shut.

DOCTOR  What is it she does now? Look how she rubs
her hands.

GENTLEWOMAN  It is an accustomed action with her to
seem thus washing her hands. I have known her
continue in this a quarter of an hour.

LADY MACBETH  Yet here's a spot.

DOCTOR  Hark, she speaks. I will set down what comes
from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more
strongly.

LADY MACBETH  Out, damned spot, out, I say! One. Two.
Why then, 'tis time to do 't. Hell is murky. Fie, my
lord, fie, a soldier and afeard? What need we fear
who knows it, when none can call our power to
account? Yet who would have thought the old man
to have had so much blood in him?

DOCTOR  Do you mark that?

LADY MACBETH  The Thane of Fife had a wife. Where is
she now? What, will these hands ne'er be clean? No
more o' that, my lord, no more o' that. You mar all
with this starting.

DOCTOR  Go to, go to. You have known what you should
not.

GENTLEWOMAN  She has spoke what she should not,
I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has
known.

LADY MACBETH  Here's the smell of the blood still. All
the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little
hand. O, O, O!

DOCTOR  What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely
charged.

GENTLEWOMAN  I would not have such a heart in my
bosom for the dignity of the whole body.

DOCTOR  Well, well, well.

GENTLEWOMAN  Pray God it be, sir.

DOCTOR  This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have
known those which have walked in their sleep,
who have died holily in their beds.

LADY MACBETH  Wash your hands. Put on your nightgown.
Look not so pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo's
buried; he cannot come out on 's grave.

DOCTOR  Even so?

LADY MACBETH  To bed, to bed. There's knocking at the
gate. Come, come, come, come. Give me your
hand. What's done cannot be undone. To bed, to
bed, to bed.	[Lady Macbeth exits.]

DOCTOR  Will she go now to bed?

GENTLEWOMAN  Directly.

DOCTOR
Foul whisp'rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
God, God forgive us all. Look after her.
Remove from her the means of all annoyance
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night.
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
I think but dare not speak.

GENTLEWOMAN  Good night, good doctor.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Drum and Colors. Enter Menteith, Caithness, Angus,
Lennox, and Soldiers.]


MENTEITH
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man.

ANGUS  Near Birnam Wood
Shall we well meet them. That way are they coming.

CAITHNESS
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?

LENNOX
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file
Of all the gentry. There is Siward's son
And many unrough youths that even now
Protest their first of manhood.

MENTEITH  What does the tyrant?

CAITHNESS
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
Some say he's mad; others that lesser hate him
Do call it valiant fury. But for certain
He cannot buckle his distempered cause
Within the belt of rule.

ANGUS  Now does he feel
His secret murders sticking on his hands.
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach.
Those he commands move only in command,
Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
Upon a dwarfish thief.

MENTEITH  Who, then, shall blame
His pestered senses to recoil and start
When all that is within him does condemn
Itself for being there?

CAITHNESS  Well, march we on
To give obedience where 'tis truly owed.
Meet we the med'cine of the sickly weal,
And with him pour we in our country's purge
Each drop of us.

LENNOX  Or so much as it needs
To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
Make we our march towards Birnam.
[They exit marching.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Macbeth, the Doctor, and Attendants.]


MACBETH
Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all.
Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
"Fear not, Macbeth. No man that's born of woman
Shall e'er have power upon thee." Then fly, false
thanes,
And mingle with the English epicures.
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

[Enter Servant.]

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
Where got'st thou that goose-look?

SERVANT  There is ten thousand--

MACBETH  Geese, villain?

SERVANT  Soldiers, sir.

MACBETH
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch?
Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?

SERVANT  The English force, so please you.

MACBETH
Take thy face hence.	[Servant exits.]
Seyton!--I am sick at heart
When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push
Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
I have lived long enough. My way of life
Is fall'n into the sere, the yellow leaf,
And that which should accompany old age,
As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have, but in their stead
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath
Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare
not.--
Seyton!

[Enter Seyton.]


SEYTON
What's your gracious pleasure?

MACBETH  What news more?

SEYTON
All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.

MACBETH
I'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked.
Give me my armor.

SEYTON  'Tis not needed yet.

MACBETH  I'll put it on.
Send out more horses. Skirr the country round.
Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine
armor.--
How does your patient, doctor?

DOCTOR  Not so sick, my lord,
As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies
That keep her from her rest.

MACBETH  Cure her of that.
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?

DOCTOR  Therein the patient
Must minister to himself.

MACBETH
Throw physic to the dogs. I'll none of it.--
Come, put mine armor on. Give me my staff.
[Attendants begin to arm him.]
Seyton, send out.--Doctor, the thanes fly from
me.--
Come, sir, dispatch.--If thou couldst, doctor, cast
The water of my land, find her disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
I would applaud thee to the very echo
That should applaud again.--Pull 't off, I say.--
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug
Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of
them?

DOCTOR
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation
Makes us hear something.

MACBETH  Bring it after me.--
I will not be afraid of death and bane
Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.

DOCTOR, [aside]
Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Drum and Colors. Enter Malcolm, Siward, Macduff,
Siward's son, Menteith, Caithness, Angus, and Soldiers,
marching.]


MALCOLM
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be safe.

MENTEITH  We doubt it nothing.

SIWARD
What wood is this before us?

MENTEITH  The Wood of Birnam.

MALCOLM
Let every soldier hew him down a bough
And bear 't before him. Thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our host and make discovery
Err in report of us.

SOLDIER  It shall be done.

SIWARD
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
Our setting down before 't.

MALCOLM  'Tis his main hope;
For, where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
And none serve with him but constrained things
Whose hearts are absent too.

MACDUFF  Let our just censures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious soldiership.

SIWARD  The time approaches
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have and what we owe.
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate;
Towards which, advance the war.
[They exit marching.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Macbeth, Seyton, and Soldiers, with Drum and
Colors.]


MACBETH
Hang out our banners on the outward walls.
The cry is still "They come!" Our castle's strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
Till famine and the ague eat them up.
Were they not forced with those that should be
ours,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home.
[A cry within of women.]
What is that noise?

SEYTON
It is the cry of women, my good lord.	[He exits.]

MACBETH
I have almost forgot the taste of fears.
The time has been my senses would have cooled
To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in 't. I have supped full with horrors.
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
Cannot once start me.

[Enter Seyton.]

Wherefore was that cry?

SEYTON  The Queen, my lord, is dead.

MACBETH  She should have died hereafter.
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.

[Enter a Messenger.]

Thou com'st to use thy tongue: thy story quickly.

MESSENGER  Gracious my lord,
I should report that which I say I saw,
But know not how to do 't.

MACBETH  Well, say, sir.

MESSENGER
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
I looked toward Birnam, and anon methought
The Wood began to move.

MACBETH  Liar and slave!

MESSENGER
Let me endure your wrath if 't be not so.
Within this three mile may you see it coming.
I say, a moving grove.

MACBETH  If thou speak'st false,
Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive
Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth,
I care not if thou dost for me as much.--
I pull in resolution and begin
To doubt th' equivocation of the fiend,
That lies like truth. "Fear not till Birnam Wood
Do come to Dunsinane," and now a wood
Comes toward Dunsinane.--Arm, arm, and out!--
If this which he avouches does appear,
There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
I 'gin to be aweary of the sun
And wish th' estate o' th' world were now
undone.--
Ring the alarum bell!--Blow wind, come wrack,
At least we'll die with harness on our back.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Drum and Colors. Enter Malcolm, Siward, Macduff, and
their army, with boughs.]


MALCOLM
Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down
And show like those you are.--You, worthy uncle,
Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we
Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,
According to our order.

SIWARD  Fare you well.
Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight,
Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.

MACDUFF
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
[They exit.]
[Alarums continued.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Macbeth.]


MACBETH
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,
But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What's he
That was not born of woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.

[Enter young Siward.]


YOUNG SIWARD  What is thy name?

MACBETH  Thou 'lt be afraid to hear it.

YOUNG SIWARD
No, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name
Than any is in hell.

MACBETH  My name's Macbeth.

YOUNG SIWARD
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.

MACBETH  No, nor more fearful.

YOUNG SIWARD
Thou liest, abhorred tyrant. With my sword
I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.
[They fight, and young Siward is slain.]

MACBETH  Thou wast born of
woman.
But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandished by man that's of a woman born.
[He exits.]

[Alarums. Enter Macduff.]


MACDUFF
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine,
My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
Or else my sword with an unbattered edge
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune,
And more I beg not.	[He exits. Alarums.]

[Enter Malcolm and Siward.]


SIWARD
This way, my lord. The castle's gently rendered.
The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,
The noble thanes do bravely in the war,
The day almost itself professes yours,
And little is to do.

MALCOLM  We have met with foes
That strike beside us.

SIWARD  Enter, sir, the castle.
[They exit. Alarum.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Macbeth.]


MACBETH
Why should I play the Roman fool and die
On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.

[Enter Macduff.]


MACDUFF  Turn, hellhound, turn!

MACBETH
Of all men else I have avoided thee.
But get thee back. My soul is too much charged
With blood of thine already.

MACDUFF  I have no words;
My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out.	[Fight. Alarum.]

MACBETH  Thou losest labor.
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
To one of woman born.

MACDUFF  Despair thy charm,
And let the angel whom thou still hast served
Tell thee Macduff was from his mother's womb
Untimely ripped.

MACBETH
Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
For it hath cowed my better part of man!
And be these juggling fiends no more believed
That palter with us in a double sense,
That keep the word of promise to our ear
And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.

MACDUFF  Then yield thee, coward,
And live to be the show and gaze o' th' time.
We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit
"Here may you see the tyrant."

MACBETH  I will not yield
To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet
And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane
And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,
And damned be him that first cries "Hold! Enough!"
[They exit fighting. Alarums.]

[They enter fighting, and Macbeth is slain. Macduff
exits carrying off Macbeth's body. Retreat and flourish.
Enter, with Drum and Colors, Malcolm, Siward, Ross,
Thanes, and Soldiers.]


MALCOLM
I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.

SIWARD
Some must go off; and yet by these I see
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

MALCOLM
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.

ROSS
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt.
He only lived but till he was a man,
The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he died.

SIWARD  Then he is dead?

ROSS
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
Must not be measured by his worth, for then
It hath no end.

SIWARD  Had he his hurts before?

ROSS
Ay, on the front.

SIWARD  Why then, God's soldier be he!
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death;
And so his knell is knolled.

MALCOLM
He's worth more sorrow, and that I'll spend for
him.

SIWARD  He's worth no more.
They say he parted well and paid his score,
And so, God be with him. Here comes newer
comfort.

[Enter Macduff with Macbeth's head.]


MACDUFF
Hail, King! for so thou art. Behold where stands
Th' usurper's cursed head. The time is free.
I see thee compassed with thy kingdom's pearl,
That speak my salutation in their minds,
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine.
Hail, King of Scotland!

ALL  Hail, King of Scotland!	[Flourish.]

MALCOLM
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves
And make us even with you. My thanes and
kinsmen,
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an honor named. What's more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
As calling home our exiled friends abroad
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen
(Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands,
Took off her life)--this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place.
So thanks to all at once and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone.
[Flourish. All exit.]

===============================================

Hamlet
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/hamlet/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
THE GHOST
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
OPHELIA
LAERTES, her brother
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
Courtiers at the Danish court:
  VOLTEMAND
  CORNELIUS
  ROSENCRANTZ
  GUILDENSTERN
  OSRIC
  Gentlemen
  A Lord
Danish soldiers:
  FRANCISCO
  BARNARDO
  MARCELLUS
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Two Messengers
Sailors
Gravedigger
Gravedigger's companion
Doctor of Divinity
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]


BARNARDO  Who's there?

FRANCISCO
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO  Long live the King!

FRANCISCO  Barnardo?

BARNARDO  He.

FRANCISCO
You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO
'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.

BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO  Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


FRANCISCO
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?

HORATIO  Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO  Give you good night.

MARCELLUS
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
you?

FRANCISCO
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
[Francisco exits.]

MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.

BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO  A piece of him.

BARNARDO
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.

HORATIO
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?

BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

HORATIO
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.

HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO  Last night of all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one--

[Enter Ghost.]


MARCELLUS
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.

BARNARDO
In the same figure like the King that's dead.

MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO
It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.

HORATIO
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
speak.

MARCELLUS
It is offended.

BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.

HORATIO
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.

BARNARDO
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on 't?

HORATIO
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?

HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
'Tis strange.

MARCELLUS
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

MARCELLUS
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is 't that can inform me?

HORATIO  That can I.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO
I think it be no other but e'en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.

[Enter Ghost.]

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
[It spreads his arms.]
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.

MARCELLUS
Shall I strike it with my partisan?

HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO  'Tis here.

HORATIO  'Tis here.
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO
It was about to speak when the cock crew.

HORATIO
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.

MARCELLUS
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.

HORATIO
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.]


KING
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
[Giving them a paper.]
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
In that and all things will we show our duty.

KING
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES  My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

KING
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.

KING
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--

HAMLET, [aside]
A little more than kin and less than kind.

KING
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.

QUEEN
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET
Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN  If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET
"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]

HAMLET
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
uncle,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]


HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.

HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!

HORATIO
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

HAMLET
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Marcellus?

MARCELLUS  My good lord.

HAMLET
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
even, sir.--
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO
A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

HAMLET
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

HORATIO
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

HAMLET
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father--methinks I see my father.

HORATIO
Where, my lord?

HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

HORATIO
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.

HAMLET
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

HORATIO
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET  Saw who?

HORATIO
My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET  The King my father?

HORATIO
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.

HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!

HORATIO
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.

HAMLET  But where was this?

MARCELLUS
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET
Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO  My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.

HAMLET  'Tis very strange.

HORATIO
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?

ALL  We do, my lord.

HAMLET
Armed, say you?

ALL  Armed, my lord.

HAMLET  From top to toe?

ALL  My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?

HORATIO
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET  Pale or red?

HORATIO
Nay, very pale.

HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?

HORATIO
Most constantly.

HAMLET  I would I had been there.

HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.

HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?

HORATIO
While one with moderate haste might tell a
hundred.

BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.

HORATIO
Not when I saw 't.

HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO
It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered.

HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
Perchance 'twill walk again.

HORATIO  I warrant it will.

HAMLET
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I'll visit you.

ALL  Our duty to your Honor.

HAMLET
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
eyes.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]


LAERTES
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.

OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?

LAERTES
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.

OPHELIA  No more but so?

LAERTES  Think it no more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

OPHELIA
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.

LAERTES  O, fear me not.

[Enter Polonius.]

I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

POLONIUS
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
thee.
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.

LAERTES
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

LAERTES
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.

OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]

POLONIUS
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.

POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
bounteous.
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.

POLONIUS
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?

OPHELIA
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion--

POLONIUS
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!

OPHELIA
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.

OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]


HAMLET
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO
It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET  What hour now?

HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.

HORATIO
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.

HORATIO  Is it a custom?

HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.

[Enter Ghost.]


HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.

HAMLET
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
[Ghost beckons.]

HORATIO
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.

MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it.

HORATIO  No, by no means.

HAMLET
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.

HORATIO
Do not, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

HORATIO
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.

MARCELLUS
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]

HAMLET  Hold off your hands.

HORATIO
Be ruled. You shall not go.

HAMLET  My fate cries out
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]

HORATIO
He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO
Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO
Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
further.

GHOST
Mark me.

HAMLET  I will.

GHOST  My hour is almost come
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.

HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.

HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.

GHOST
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET  What?

GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

HAMLET  O God!

GHOST
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET  Murder?

GHOST
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST  I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown.

HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!

GHOST
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]

HAMLET
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables--meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
[He writes.]
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
I have sworn 't.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


HORATIO  My lord, my lord!

MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO  Heavens secure him!

HAMLET  So be it.

MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!

MARCELLUS
How is 't, my noble lord?

HORATIO  What news, my lord?

HAMLET  O, wonderful!

HORATIO
Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.

HORATIO
Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
it?
But you'll be secret?

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he's an arrant knave.

HORATIO
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.

HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
(For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
I will go pray.

HORATIO
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes, faith, heartily.

HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.

HAMLET
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.

HAMLET
Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.

HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.

HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET
Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.

HAMLET
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.

HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.

HAMLET
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
would,"
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
might,"
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let's go together.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]


POLONIUS
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

POLONIUS
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS
"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

POLONIUS
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country--

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
or so," and "gentleman."

POLONIUS
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO
My lord, I have.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

POLONIUS
Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

POLONIUS
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

OPHELIA
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

OPHELIA
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

POLONIUS
Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS  What said he?

OPHELIA
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?

OPHELIA
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.]


KING
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.

QUEEN
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.

KING
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!

QUEEN  Ay, amen!
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.

KING
Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

KING
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

POLONIUS
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

KING
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
[Polonius exits.]
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.

QUEEN
I doubt it is no other but the main--
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

KING
Well, we shall sift him.

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.]

Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
[He gives a paper.]
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.

KING  It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home!
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

POLONIUS
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
most beautified Ophelia--
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
[He reads the letter.]
	Doubt thou the stars are fire,
	   Doubt that the sun doth move,
	Doubt truth to be a liar,
	   But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.

KING  But how hath she received his love?

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

KING
As of a man faithful and honorable.

POLONIUS
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

POLONIUS
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise?

KING  Not that I know.

POLONIUS
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.

KING  How may we try it further?

POLONIUS
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

POLONIUS
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING  We will try it.

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]


QUEEN
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.

POLONIUS
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
daughter?

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to 't.

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET  Between who?

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET  Into my grave?

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
I will take my leave of you.

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]


POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
[Polonius exits.]

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?

ROSENCRANTZ
As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
grown honest.

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
th' worst.

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
'Tis too narrow for your mind.

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
you love me, hold not off.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
delights not me"?

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for 't. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
and his load too.

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
[A flourish for the Players.]

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, 'twas then indeed.

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome--

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	One fair daughter, and no more,
	The which he loved passing well.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
	It came to pass, as most like it was--
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.

[Enter the Players.]

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line--let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.

FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!

POLONIUS  This is too long.

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

FIRST PLAYER
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

HAMLET
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.]


KING
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN
But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.]

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.

QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
[Queen exits.]

POLONIUS
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself.

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!

POLONIUS
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
[They withdraw.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.

OPHELIA  Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

OPHELIA
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.

HAMLET
No, not I. I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

OPHELIA  My lord?

HAMLET  Are you fair?

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where's your father?

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

OPHELIA
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

KING, [advancing with Polonius]
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

POLONIUS
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

KING  It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]


HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
[Players exit.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

[Enter Horatio.]


HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.

HORATIO
O, my dear lord--

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
[Sound a flourish.]

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
torches.]


KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
played once i' th' university, you say?

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.

HAMLET  What did you enact?

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
Capitol. Brutus killed me.

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.--Be the players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
legs.

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

HAMLET  Nothing.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET  Who, I?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
hours.

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot."
[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
[Players exit.]

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.

[Enter Prologue.]


HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
what it means.

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
play.

PROLOGUE
	For us and for our tragedy,
	Here stooping to your clemency,
	We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET  As woman's love.

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]


PLAYER KING
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

PLAYER QUEEN
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER KING
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--

PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

PLAYER QUEEN
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER KING
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

PLAYER KING
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
[Player Queen exits.]

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in 't?

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i' th' world.

KING  What do you call the play?

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.

[Enter Lucianus.]

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.

LUCIANUS
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
[Pours the poison in his ears.]

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
[Claudius rises.]

OPHELIA  The King rises.

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

KING  Give me some light. Away!

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

HAMLET
	Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
	   The hart ungalled play.
	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
	   Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?

HORATIO  Half a share.

HAMLET  A whole one, I.
	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
	   This realm dismantled was
	Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
	   A very very--pajock.

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
	For if the King like not the comedy,
	Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]


GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

HAMLET  You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say--

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother's admiration? Impart.

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
proverb is something musty.

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET  I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.

[Enter Polonius.]

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
shape of a camel?

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
come by and by.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
'Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]


KING
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

KING
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
[Polonius exits.]
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.	[He kneels.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
[He sheathes his sword.]
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING, [rising]
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Queen and Polonius.]


POLONIUS
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

QUEEN
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET
Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN
Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

QUEEN
Have you forgot me?

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

QUEEN
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

HAMLET
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
O, I am slain!

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

QUEEN
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.

QUEEN
As kill a king?

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?

HAMLET  Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
O'er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN  Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

HAMLET
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.

HAMLET  Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket--

QUEEN  No more!

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

[Enter Ghost.]

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
figure?

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

HAMLET
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

HAMLET
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
[Ghost exits.]

QUEEN
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.

HAMLET  Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

HAMLET
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either ... the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
[Pointing to Polonius.]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.

QUEEN  What shall I do?

HAMLET
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.

QUEEN
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET
I must to England, you know that.

QUEEN  Alack,
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Good night, mother.
[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern.]


KING
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?

QUEEN
Bestow this place on us a little while.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

QUEEN
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.

KING  O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all--
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

QUEEN
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

KING  O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what's untimely done. ...
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Safely stowed.

GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.

[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


ROSENCRANTZ
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

HAMLET
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

ROSENCRANTZ
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?

ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.

ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
body is and go with us to the King.

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing--

GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King and two or three.]


KING
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.

[Enter Rosencrantz.]

How now, what hath befallen?

ROSENCRANTZ
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.

KING  But where is he?

ROSENCRANTZ
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

KING
Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.

[They enter with Hamlet.]


KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

HAMLET  At supper.

KING  At supper where?

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
That's the end.

KING  Alas, alas!

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.

KING  What dost thou mean by this?

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.

KING  Where is Polonius?

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.

KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]

KING
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.

HAMLET  For England?

KING  Ay, Hamlet.

HAMLET  Good.

KING
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

HAMLET
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.

KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.

HAMLET
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Come, for England.	[He exits.]

KING
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
[All but the King exit.]
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]


FORTINBRAS
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.

CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.

FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]

[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

CAPTAIN
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

HAMLET
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?

CAPTAIN
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

HAMLET
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

CAPTAIN
Yes, it is already garrisoned.

HAMLET
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?

HAMLET
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]


QUEEN  I will not speak with her.

GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.

QUEEN  What would she have?

GENTLEMAN
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

HORATIO
'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

[Enter Ophelia distracted.]


OPHELIA
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?

OPHELIA [sings]
	How should I your true love know
	   From another one?
	By his cockle hat and staff
	   And his sandal shoon.

QUEEN
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
	   He is dead and gone;
	At his head a grass-green turf,
	   At his heels a stone.
Oh, ho!

QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--

OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--

[Enter King.]


QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.

OPHELIA [sings]
	   Larded all with sweet flowers;
	Which bewept to the ground did not go
	   With true-love showers.

KING  How do you, pretty lady?

OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
know not what we may be. God be at your table.

KING  Conceit upon her father.

OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
they ask you what it means, say you this:
[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
	   All in the morning betime,
	And I a maid at your window,
	   To be your Valentine.
	Then up he rose and donned his clothes
	   And dupped the chamber door,
	Let in the maid, that out a maid
	   Never departed more.

KING  Pretty Ophelia--

OPHELIA
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
	   Alack and fie for shame,
	Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
	   By Cock, they are to blame.
	Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
	   You promised me to wed."
He answers:
	"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
	   An thou hadst not come to my bed."

KING  How long hath she been thus?

OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]

KING
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
[Horatio exits.]
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
All from her father's death, and now behold!
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
whispers
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
[A noise within.]

QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?

KING  Attend!
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

[Enter a Messenger.]

What is the matter?

MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
[A noise within.]

QUEEN
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

KING  The doors are broke.

[Enter Laertes with others.
]

LAERTES
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.

ALL  No, let's come in!

LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.

ALL  We will, we will.

LAERTES
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
vile king,
Give me my father!

QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.

LAERTES
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
bastard,
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother.

KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Gertrude.--
Speak, man.

LAERTES  Where is my father?

KING  Dead.

QUEEN
But not by him.

KING  Let him demand his fill.

LAERTES
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.

KING  Who shall stay you?

LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.

KING  Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
foe,
Winner and loser?

LAERTES  None but his enemies.

KING  Will you know them, then?

LAERTES
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.

KING  Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father's death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As day does to your eye.

  [A noise within:] "Let her come in!"

LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?

[Enter Ophelia.]

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.

OPHELIA [sings]
	They bore him barefaced on the bier,
	Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
	And in his grave rained many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove.

LAERTES
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.

OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
daughter.

LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.

OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
that's for thoughts.

LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
fitted.

OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
give you some violets, but they withered all when
my father died. They say he made a good end.
[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

LAERTES
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.

OPHELIA [sings]
	And will he not come again?
	And will he not come again?
	   No, no, he is dead.
	   Go to thy deathbed.
	He never will come again.

	His beard was as white as snow,
	All flaxen was his poll.
	   He is gone, he is gone,
	   And we cast away moan.
	God 'a mercy on his soul.
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
you.	[She exits.]

LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?

KING
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.

LAERTES  Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call 't in question.

KING  So you shall,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
I pray you, go with me.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Horatio and others.]


HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?

GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
letters for you.

HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
know from what part of the world I should be
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

[Enter Sailors.]


SAILOR  God bless you, sir.

HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.

SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]

HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
hold their course for England; of them I have
much to tell thee. Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter King and Laertes.]


KING
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.

LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.

KING  O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.

LAERTES
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

KING
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]

How now? What news?

MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.

KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?

MESSENGER
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.

KING  Laertes, you shall hear
them.--
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
and more strange return. Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?

LAERTES  Know you the hand?

KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
Can you advise me?

LAERTES
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
"Thus didst thou."

KING  If it be so, Laertes
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Will you be ruled by me?

LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

KING
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.

LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.

KING  It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.

LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?

KING
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.

LAERTES  A Norman was 't?

KING  A Norman.

LAERTES
Upon my life, Lamord.

KING  The very same.

LAERTES
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.

KING  He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
Now out of this--

LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?

KING
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?

LAERTES  Why ask you this?

KING
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this "would"
changes
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father's son
More than in words?

LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.

KING
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Requite him for your father.

LAERTES  I will do 't,
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.

KING  Let's further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
performance,
'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
I ha 't!
When in your motion you are hot and dry
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
noise?

[Enter Queen.]


QUEEN
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.

LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?

QUEEN
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.

LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.

QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.

LAERTES
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]

KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let's follow.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?

OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
herself in her own defense?

OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.

GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
drowned herself wittingly.

OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--

GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
own life.

OTHER  But is this law?

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.

OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
world to drown or hang themselves more than
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.

OTHER  Was he a gentleman?

GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.

OTHER  Why, he had none.

GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself--

OTHER  Go to!

GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
thousand tenants.

GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.

OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?"

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.

GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.

OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
beating. And, when you are asked this question
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
stoup of liquor.
[The Other Man exits
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
	In youth when I did love, did love,
	   Methought it was very sweet
	To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
	   O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.

HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.

HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
easiness.

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	But age with his stealing steps
	Hath clawed me in his clutch,
	And hath shipped me into the land,
	As if I had never been such.
[He digs up a skull.]

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?

HORATIO  It might, my lord.

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on 't.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	A pickax and a spade, a spade,
	For and a shrouding sheet,
	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.
[He digs up more skulls.]

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
Whose grave's this, sirrah?

GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
mine.

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.

GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
from me to you.

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.

HAMLET  What woman then?

GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
her soul, she's dead.

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
grave-maker?

GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
Fortinbras.

HAMLET  How long is that since?

GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
matter there.

HAMLET  Why?

GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
the men are as mad as he.

HAMLET  How came he mad?

GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
year.

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
three-and-twenty years.

HAMLET  Whose was it?

GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
Whose do you think it was?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
King's jester.

HAMLET  This?

GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.

HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

HORATIO  What's that, my lord?

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
fashion i' th' earth?

HORATIO  E'en so.

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]

HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
so.

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

DOCTOR
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.

LAERTES
Must there no more be done?

DOCTOR  No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.

LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.

HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?

QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
[She scatters flowers.]
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave.

LAERTES  O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
[Leaps in the grave.]
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.

HAMLET, [advancing]
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.

LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
The devil take thy soul!

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

KING  Pluck them asunder.

QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!

ALL  Gentlemen!

HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]

HAMLET
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

QUEEN  O my son, what theme?

HAMLET
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!

QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
thyself,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
I'll rant as well as thou.

QUEEN  This is mere madness;
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
[Horatio exits.]
[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
night's speech.
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]


HAMLET
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?

HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!

HAMLET
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will--

HORATIO  That is most
certain.

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery--an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.

HORATIO  Is 't possible?

HAMLET
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
[Handing him a paper.]
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

HORATIO  I beseech you.

HAMLET
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote?

HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.

HAMLET
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.

HORATIO  How was this sealed?

HAMLET
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.

HORATIO
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.

HAMLET
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!

HAMLET
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?

HORATIO
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.

HAMLET
It will be short. The interim's mine,
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion.

HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?

[Enter Osric, a courtier.]


OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
Denmark.

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
Dost know this waterfly?

HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.

HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
head.

OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.

OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.

OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
Osric to put on his hat.]

OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.

OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?

OSRIC  Sir?

HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.

HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?

OSRIC  Of Laertes?

HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
are spent.

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?

OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
is--

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.

OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
unfellowed.

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
of very liberal conceit.

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.

OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all "impawned," as you call it?

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
in trial.

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.

OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.

OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.

HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
turn.

HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head.

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.

[Enter a Lord.]


LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
take longer time.

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.

LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.

HAMLET  In happy time.

LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]

HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
about my heart. But it is no matter.

HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]


KING
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]

HAMLET, [to Laertes]
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
And hurt my brother.

LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
I do receive your offered love like love
And will not wrong it.

HAMLET  I embrace it freely
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
Give us the foils. Come on.

LAERTES  Come, one for me.

HAMLET
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

LAERTES  You mock me, sir.

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

KING
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

KING
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.

LAERTES
This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
[Prepare to play.]

KING
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
[Trumpets the while.]

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]

HAMLET  One.

LAERTES  No.

HAMLET  Judgment!

OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.

LAERTES  Well, again.

KING
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here's to thy health.
[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Give him the cup.

HAMLET
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?

LAERTES
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.

KING
Our son shall win.

QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
[She lifts the cup.]

HAMLET  Good madam.

KING  Gertrude, do not drink.

QUEEN
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]

KING, [aside]
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.

HAMLET
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.

LAERTES, [to Claudius]
My lord, I'll hit him now.

KING  I do not think 't.

LAERTES, [aside]
And yet it is almost against my conscience.

HAMLET
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]

OSRIC  Nothing neither way.

LAERTES  Have at you now!
[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]

KING  Part them. They are incensed.

HAMLET  Nay, come again.
[The Queen falls.]

OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!

HORATIO
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?

OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?

LAERTES
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
[He falls.]
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

HAMLET
How does the Queen?

KING  She swoons to see them bleed.

QUEEN
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]

HAMLET
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
Treachery! Seek it out.

LAERTES
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.

HAMLET
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.	[Hurts the King.]

ALL  Treason, treason!

KING
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.

HAMLET
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
[Forcing him to drink the poison.]
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]

LAERTES  He is justly served.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]

HAMLET
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.

HORATIO  Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
[A march afar off and shot within.]
What warlike noise is this?

[Enter Osric.]


OSRIC
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th' ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]

HORATIO
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
[March within.]
Why does the drum come hither?

[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]


FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?

HORATIO  What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

FORTINBRAS
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?

AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?

HORATIO  Not from his
mouth,
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.

FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

HORATIO
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
more.
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
mischance
On plots and errors happen.

FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier's music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
ordnance are shot off.]
